# Chapter 9: Phosphate transfer reactions

<img src="media/image2.jpeg" style="width:6in;height:3.99931in" />

**Mono Lake, California**

(photo credit https://www.flickr.com/photos/slolane/)

## Introduction

This chapter is about the chemistry of phosphates, a ubiquitous
functional group in biomolecules that is based on phosphoric acid:

<img src="media/image3.emf" style="width:0.96319in;height:0.93542in" />

fig 1d

In late 2010, people around the world found themselves getting a crash
course in phosphate chemistry as they watched the evening news. Those
who paid close attention to the developing story also got an interesting
glimpse into the world of scientific research and debate.

It all started when the American National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) released the following statement to the news
media:

> “NASA will hold a news conference at 2 p.m. EST on Thursday, Dec. 2,
> to

discuss an astrobiology finding that will impact the search for evidence
of

extraterrestrial life.”

The wording of the statement attracted widespread media attention, and
had some people holding their breath in anticipation that NASA would be
introducing a newly discovered alien life form to the world. When
December 2<sup>nd</sup> came, however, those hoping to meet ET were
disappointed – the life form being introduced was a bacterium, and it
was from our own planet. To biologists and chemists, though, the
announcement was nothing less than astounding.

The NASA scientists worked hard to emphasize the significance of their
discovery during the news conference. Dr. Felicia Wolfe-Simon, a young
postdoctoral researcher who had spearheaded the project, stated that
they had “cracked open the door to what's possible for life elsewhere in
the universe - and that's profound". A senior NASA scientist claimed
that their results would "fundamentally change how we define life", and,
in attempting to convey the importance of the discovery to a reporter
from the newspaper USA Today, referred to an episode from the original
Star Trek television series in which the crew of the Starship Enterprise
encounters a race of beings whose biochemistry is based on silica rather
than carbon.

The new strain of bacteria, dubbed 'GFAJ-1', had been isolated from the
arsenic-rich mud surrounding salty, alkaline Mono Lake in central
California. What made the strain so unique, according to the NASA team,
was that it had evolved the ability to substitute arsenate for phosphate
in its DNA. Students of biology and chemistry know that phosphorus is
one of the six elements that are absolutely required for life as we know
it, and that DNA is a polymer linked by phosphate groups. Arsenic, which
is directly below phosphorus on the periodic table, is able to assume a
bonding arrangement like that of phosphate, so it might seem reasonable
to wonder whether arsenate could replace phosphate in DNA and other
biological molecules. Actually finding a living thing with
arsenate-linked DNA would indeed be a momentous achievement in biology,
as this would represent a whole new chemistry for the most fundamental
molecule of life, and would change our understanding of the chemical
requirements for life to exist on earth - and potentially other planets.

In 1987, Professor F.H. Westheimer of Harvard University published what
would become a widely read commentary in Science Magazine entitled “Why
Nature Chose Phosphates”. In it, he discussed the chemical properties
that make the phosphate group so ideal for the many roles that it plays
in biochemistry, chief among them the role of a linker group for DNA
polymers. One of the critical characteristics of phosphate that
Westheimer pointed out was that the bonds linking phosphate to organic
molecules are stable in water. Clearly, if you are selecting a
functional group to link your DNA, you don't want to choose one that
will rapidly break apart in water. Among the functional groups that
Westheimer compared to phosphate in terms of its suitability as a
potential DNA linker was arsenate –but he very quickly dismissed the
idea of arsenate-linked DNA because it would be far too unstable in
water.

Given this background, it is not hard to imagine that many scientists
were puzzled, to say the least, by the NASA results. While the popular
media took the announcement at face value and excitedly reported the
results as a monumental discovery – NASA is, after all, a highly
respected scientific body and the study was being published in Science
Magazine, one of the most prestigious scientific journals in the world –
many scientists quickly voiced their skepticism, mainly in the
relatively new and unconstrained venue of the blogosphere.
Microbiologist Rosie Redfield of the University of British Columbia,
writing in her blog devoted to 'open science', wrote a detailed and
highly critical analysis of the study. She pointed out, among other
things, that the experimenters had failed to perform the critical
purification and mass spectrometry analyses needed to demonstrate that
arsenate was indeed being incorporated into the DNA backbone, and that
the broth in which the bacteria were being grown actually contained
enough phosphate for them to live and replicate using normal
phosphate-linked DNA. Science journalist Carl Zimmer, in a column in the
online magazine Slate, contacted twelve experts to get their opinions,
and they were overwhelmingly negative. One of the experts said bluntly,
“This paper should not have been published". Basically, the NASA
researchers were making an astounding claim that, if true, would refute
decades of established knowledge about the chemistry of DNA – but the
evidence they presented was far from convincing. Carl Sagan's widely
quoted dictum - “extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence” -
seemed to apply remarkably well to the situation.

What followed was a very public, very lively, and not always completely
collegial debate among scientists about the proper way to discuss
science: the NASA researchers appeared to dismiss the criticism amassed
against their study because it came from blogs, websites, and Twitter
feeds. The proper venue for such discussion, they claimed, was in the
peer-reviewed literature. Critics countered that their refusal to
respond to anything outside of the traditional peer-review system was
disingenuous, because they had made full use of the publicity-generating
power of the internet and mainstream media in the first place when they
announced their results with such fanfare.

The traditional venue for debate, while quite a bit slower than the
blogosphere, did eventually come through. When the full paper was
published in Science a few months later, it was accompanied by eight
'technical comments' from other researchers pointing out deficiencies in
the study, an 'editors note', and a broader news article about the
controversy. In July of 2012, a paper was published in Science under the
title “GFAJ-1 Is an Arsenate-Resistant, Phosphate-Dependent Organism”.
The paper reported definitive evidence that DNA from GFAJ-1, under the
conditions described in the NASA paper, did *not* have arsenate
incorporated into its structure. Just like professor Westheimer
discussed in the 1980s, it appears that nature really did choose
phosphate – and only phosphate – after all . . . at least on this
planet.

<u>Background reading and viewing:</u>

Youtube video of the NASA press conference:

> http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WVuhBt03z8g.

Wolfe-Simon, F. et al. *Science Express*, Dec 2, 2010. The first preview
article on the proposed 'arsenic bacteria'.

Wolfe-Simon, F. et al., *Science* **2011**, *332*, 1163. The full
research paper in Science Magazine.

Westheimer, F.H. *Science* **1987**, *235*, 1173. The article by
Westheimer titled 'Why Nature Chose Phosphates'.

Zimmer, Carl, Slate, Dec 7, 2010: Blog post by Carl Zimmer titled 'This
Paper Should Not Have Been Published'.

http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2010/12/this_paper_should_not_have_been_published.html

Redfield, R. Blog post Dec 4, 2010:

http://rrresearch.fieldofscience.com/2010/12/arsenic-associated-bacteria-nasas.html

*Science* **2012**, *337*, 467. The paper in Science Magazine refuting
the validity of the arsenic bacteria claim.

## Section 9.1: Overview of phosphate groups 

Phosphate is everywhere in biochemistry. As we were reminded in the
introduction to this chapter, our DNA is linked by phosphate:

<img src="media/image4.emf" style="width:2.60208in;height:2.72222in" />

fig 1a

The function of many proteins is regulated - switched on and off - by
enzymes which attach or remove a phosphate group from the side chains of
serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues.

<img src="media/image5.emf" style="width:5.26875in;height:2in" />

fig 1b

Countless diseases are caused by defects in phosphate transferring
enzymes. As just one example, achondroplasia, a common cause of
dwarfism, is caused by a defect in an enzyme whose function is to
transfer a phosphate to a tyrosine residue in a growth-related signaling
protein.

Finally, phosphates are excellent leaving groups in biological organic
reactions, as we will see many times throughout the remainder of this
book.

Clearly, an understanding of phosphate chemistry is central to the study
of biological organic chemistry. We'll begin with an overview of terms
used when talking about phosphates.

### 9.1A: Terms and abbreviations

The fully deprotonated conjugate base of phosphoric acid is called a
phosphate ion, or **inorganic phosphate** (often abbreviated
'P*<sub>i</sub>*'). When two phosphate groups are linked to each other,
the linkage itself is referred to as a **'phosphate anhydride'**, and
the compound is called **'inorganic pyrophosphate'** (often abbreviated
PP*<sub>i</sub>*).

<img src="media/image6.emf" style="width:4.72222in;height:1.40764in" />

fig 1

The chemical linkage between phosphate and a carbon atom is a
**phosphate ester**. Adenosine monophosphate (AMP) has a single
phosphate ester linkage.

<img src="media/image7.emf" style="width:2.32431in;height:1.93542in" />

fig 2

Adenosine triphosphate has one phosphate ester linkage and two phosphate
anhydride linkages.

<img src="media/image8.emf" style="width:3.21319in;height:1.88889in" />

fig 3

Oxygen atoms in phosphate groups are referred to either as
**'bridging'** or **'non-bridging'**, depending on their position. An
organic diphosphate has two bridging oxygens (one in the phosphate ester
linkage and one in the phosphate anhydride linkage) and five
non-bridging oxygens:

<img src="media/image9.emf" style="width:3.21319in;height:0.69444in" />

fig 4

A single phosphate is linked to *two* organic groups is called
**phosphate diester**. The backbone of DNA is linked by phosphate
diesters.

<img src="media/image10.emf" style="width:3.12986in;height:2.27778in" />

fig 5

Organic phosphates are often abbreviated using 'OP' and 'OPP' for mono-
and diphosphates, respectively. For example, glucose-6-phosphate and
isopentenyl diphosphate are often depicted as shown below. Notice that
the '*P*' abbreviation includes the associated oxygen atoms and negative
charges.

<img src="media/image11.emf" style="width:4.63889in;height:3in" />

fig 6

<u>Exercise 9.1</u>: Consider the biological compounds below, some of
which are shown with abbreviated structures:

<img src="media/image12.emf" style="width:6in;height:4.59633in" />

fig 4a

a\) Which contain one or more phosphate anhydride linkages? Specify the
number of phosphate anhydride linkages in your answers.

b\) Which contain one or more phosphate monoesters? Again, specify the
number for each answer.

c\) Which contain a phosphate diester?

d\) Which could be described as an organic diphosphate?

e\) For each compound, specify the number of bridging and non-bridging
oxygens in the phosphate group.

<u>  
</u>

### 9.1B: Acid constants and protonation states

Phosphoric acid is triprotic, meaning that it has three acidic protons
available to donate, with pK<sub>a</sub> values of 1.0, 6.5, and 13.0,
respectively. (da Silva and Williams)

<img src="media/image13.emf" style="width:4.19444in;height:1.29653in" />

fig 7

These acid constant values, along with the Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation (section 7.2C) tell us that, at the physiological pH of
approximately 7, somewhat more than half of the phosphate species will
be in the HPO<sub>4</sub><sup>-2</sup> state, and slightly less than
half will be in the H<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub><sup>-1</sup> state,
meaning that the average net charge is between -1.5 and -2.0.

Phosphate diesters have a pKa of about 1, meaning that they carry a full
negative charge at physiological pH.

<img src="media/image14.emf" style="width:2.94444in;height:1.19444in" />

fig 7a

Organic monophosphates, diphosphates, and triphosphates all have net
negative charges and are partially protonated at physiological pH, but
by convention are usually drawn in the fully deprotonated state.

<u>Exercise 9.2</u>: Explain why the second pKa of phosphoric acid is so
much higher than the first pKa.

<u>Exercise 9.3</u>: What is the approximate net charge of inorganic
phosphate in a solution buffered to pH 1?

Recall from section 8.4 that good leaving groups in organic reactions
are, as a rule, weak bases. In laboratory organic reactions, leaving
groups are often halides or toluenesulfonates (section 8.4), both of
which are weak bases. **In biological organic reactions, phosphates are
very common leaving groups**. These could be inorganic phosphate,
inorganic pyrophosphate, or organic monophosphates, all of which are
weakly basic, especially when coordinated to metal cations such as
Mg<sup>+2</sup> in the active site of an enzyme. We will see many
examples of phosphate leave groups in this and subsequent chapters.

### 9.1C: Bonding in phosphates 

Looking at the location of phosphorus on the periodic table, you might
expect it to bond and react in a fashion similar to nitrogen, which is
located just above it in the same column. Indeed, **phosphines** -
phosphorus analogs of amines - are commonly used in the organic
laboratory.

<img src="media/image15.emf" style="width:2.46319in;height:0.75in" />

fig 8

However it is in the form of *phosphate*, rather than phosphine, that
phosphorus plays its main role in biology.

The four oxygen substituents in phosphate groups are arranged about the
central phosphorus atom with *tetrahedral geometry*, however there are a
total of *five* bonds to phosphorus - four σ bonds and one delocalized π
bond.

<img src="media/image16.emf" style="width:4.58333in;height:1.75in" />

fig 9

Phosphorus can break the 'octet rule' because it is on the third row of
the periodic table, and thus has *d* orbitals available for bonding. The
minus 3 charge on a fully deprotonated phosphate ion is spread evenly
over the four oxygen atoms, and each phosphorus-oxygen bond can be
considered to have 25% double bond character: in other words, the bond
order is 1.25.

Recall from section 2.1 the hybrid bonding picture for the tetrahedral
nitrogen in an amine group: a single 2*s* and three 2*p* orbitals
combine to form four *sp<sup>3</sup>* hybrid orbitals, three of which
form σ bonds and one of which holds a lone pair of electrons.

<img src="media/image17.emf" style="width:4.75in;height:2.30556in" />

fig 10

In the hybrid orbital picture for phosphate ion, a single 3*s* and three
3*p* orbitals also combine to form four *sp<sup>3</sup>* hybrid orbitals
with tetrahedral geometry. In contrast to an amine, however, four of the
five valance electrons on phosphorus occupy *sp<sup>3</sup>* orbitals,
and the fifth occupies an unhybridized 3*d* orbital.

<img src="media/image18.emf" style="width:5.77778in;height:2.11111in" />

fig 11

This orbital arrangement allows for four σ bonds with tetrahedral
geometry in addition to a fifth, delocalized π bond formed by π overlap
between the half-filled 3*d* orbital on phosphorus and 2*p* orbitals on
the oxygen atoms.

In phosphate esters, diesters, and anhydrides the π bonding is
delocalized primarily over the *non-bridging bonds*, while the bridging
bonds have mainly single-bond character. In a phosphate diester, for
example, the two non-bridging oxygens share a -1 charge, as illustrated
by the two major resonance contributors below. The bonding order for the
bridging P-O bonds in a phosphate diester group is about 1, and for the
non-bridging P-O bonds about 1.5. In the resonance contributors in which
the bridging oxygens are shown as double bonds (to the right in the
figure below), there is an additional separation of charge - thus these
contributors are minor and make a relatively unimportant contribution to
the overall bonding picture.

<img src="media/image19.emf" style="width:4.63889in;height:2.15764in" />

fig 12

<u>Exercise 9.4:</u> Draw all of the resonance structures showing the
delocalization of charge on a (fully deprotonated) organic
monophosphate. If a 'bond order' of 1.0 is a single bond, and a bond
order of 2.0 is a double bond, what is the approximate bond order of
bridging and non-bridging P-O bonds?

Throughout this book, phosphate groups will often be drawn without
attempting to show tetrahedral geometry, and π bonds and negative
charges will usually be shown localized to a single oxygen. This is done
for the sake of simplification - however it is important always to
remember that the phosphate group is really tetrahedral, the negative
charges are delocalized over the non-bridging oxygens, and that there is
some degree of protonation at physiological pH (with the exception of
the phosphate diester group).

## Section 9.2: Phosphate transfer reactions - an overview

In a phosphate transfer reaction, a phosphate group is transferred from
a **phosphate group donor** molecule to a **phosphate group acceptor**
molecule:

<img src="media/image20.emf" style="width:5.04653in;height:1.11111in" />

fig 13

A very important aspect of biological phosphate transfer reactions is
that the electrophilicity of the phosphorus atom is usually enhanced by
the Lewis acid (electron-accepting) effect of one or more magnesium
ions. Phosphate transfer enzymes generally contain a Mg<sup>2+</sup> ion
bound in the active site in a position where it can interact with
non-bridging phosphate oxygens on the substrate. The magnesium ion pulls
electron density *away* from the phosphorus atom, making it more
electrophilic.

<img src="media/image21.emf" style="width:4.40764in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 17

Without this metal ion interaction, a phosphate is actually a poor
electrophile, as the negatively-charged oxygens shield the phosphorus
center from attack by a nucleophile.

Note: For the sake of simplicity and clarity, we will not draw the
magnesium ion or other active site groups interacting with phosphate
oxygens in most figures in this chapter - but it is important to keep in
mind that these interactions play an integral role in phosphate transfer
reactions.

Mechanistically speaking, a phosphate transfer reaction at a phosphorus
center can be though of as much like a S<sub>N</sub>2 reaction at a
carbon center. Just like in an S<sub>N</sub>2 reaction, the nucleophile
in a phosphoryl transfer approaches the electrophilic center from the
backside, opposite the leaving group:

**  
**

**Concerted model:**

<img src="media/image22.emf" style="width:5.72222in;height:4.80556in" />

fig 17a

As the nucleophile gets closer and the leaving group begins its
departure, the bonding geometry at the phosphorus atom changes from
tetrahedral to trigonal bipyramidal at the pentavalent (5-bond)
transition state. As the phosphorus-nucleophile bond gets shorter and
the phosphorus-leaving group bond grows longer, the bonding picture
around the phosphorus atom returns to its original tetrahedral state,
but the stereochemical configuration has been 'flipped', or inverted.

In the trigonal bipyramidal transition state, the five substituents are
not equivalent: the three non-bridging oxygens are said to be
**equatorial** (forming the base of a trigonal bipyramid), while the
nucleophile and the leaving group are said to be **apical** (occupying
the tips of the two pyramids).

<img src="media/image23.emf" style="width:4.60208in;height:2.01875in" />

fig 17b

Although stereochemical inversion in phosphoryl transfer reactions is
predicted by theory, the fact that phosphoryl groups are achiral made it
impossible to observe the phenomenon directly until 1978, when a group
of researchers was able to synthesize organic phosphate esters in which
stable oxygen isotopes <sup>17</sup>O and <sup>18</sup>O were
specifically incorporated. This created a chiral phosphate center.

<img src="media/image24.emf" style="width:4.63889in;height:1.57431in" />

fig 17c

Subsequent experiments with phosphoryl transfer-catalyzing enzymes
confirmed that these reactions proceed with stereochemical inversion.
(*Nature* **1978** *275*, 564; *Ann Rev Biochem* **1980** *49*, 877).

The concerted (S<sub>N</sub>2-like) is not the only mechanism that has
been proposed for these reactions - in fact, two other possible
mechanisms have been suggested. In an alternative two-step mechanistic
model, the nucleophile could attack first, forming

a pentavalent, trigonal bipyramidal *intermediate* (as apposed to a
pentavalent *transition state*). The reaction is completed when the
leaving group is expelled. The intermediate species would occupy an
energy *valley* between the two transition states.

**  
**

**Addition-elimination model:**

<img src="media/image25.emf" style="width:4.86111in;height:3.96319in" />

fig 17e

This is often referred to as an **'addition-elimination**' mechanism -
the nucleophile *adds* to the phosphate first, forming a pentavalent
intermediate, and then the leaving group is *eliminated*.

An addition-elimination mechanism with a pentavalent intermediate is
*not* possible for an S<sub>N</sub>2 reaction at a carbon center,
because carbon, as a second-row element, does not have any *d* orbitals
and cannot form five bonds. Phosphorus, on the other hand, is a
third-row element and is quite capable of forming more than four bonds.
Phosphorus pentachloride, after all, is a stable compound that has five
bonds to chlorine arranged in trigonal bipyramidal geometry around the
central phosphorus.

<img src="media/image26.emf" style="width:0.75in;height:0.75in" />

fig 17f

The phosphorus atom in PCl<sub>5</sub> (and in the hypothetical
pentavalent intermediate pictured above) is considered to be
**sp<sup>3</sup>d** **hybridized**:

<img src="media/image27.emf" style="width:4.94444in;height:1.11111in" />

fig 17g

There is a third possibility: the reaction could proceed in an
S<sub>N</sub>1-like manner: in other words, **elimination-addition**. In
this model, the phosphorus-leaving group bond breaks first, resulting in
a **metaphosphate** intermediate. This intermediate, which corresponds
to the carbocation intermediate in an S<sub>N</sub>1 reaction and like a
carbocation has trigonal planar geometry, is then attacked by the
nucleophile to form the reaction product.

**Elimination-addition model:**

<img src="media/image28.emf" style="width:4.63889in;height:4.02778in" />

fig 5

fig 17h

So which mechanistic model - concerted (S<sub>N</sub>2-like),
addition-elimination, or elimination-addition - best describes enzymatic
phosphate transfer reactions? Chemists love to investigate and debate
questions like this! Just like with the S<sub>N</sub>1/S<sub>N</sub>2
argument discussed in chapter 8, it really boils down to one question:
which happens first, bond-forming or bond-breaking - or do these two
events occur at the same time? From the evidence accumulated to date, it
appears that many enzymatic phosphate transfer reactions can best be
described by the concerted model, although there is still argument about
this, and still many unanswered questions about other details of how
these reactions are catalyzed in active sites. Considering the
importance of phosphate transfer reactions in metabolic pathways, this
area is clearly a very promising one for further investigation. If you
are interesting in learning more about this research, a great place to
start is a review article written by Professor Daniel Herschlag at
Stanford University (*Annu. Rev. Biochem*. **2011**, *80*, 669).

For the sake of simplicity and clarity, phosphoryl transfers in this
text will be depicted using the concerted model.

<u>  
Exercise 9.5</u>: Predict the approximate angles between the two bonds
indicated in a phosphate transfer transition state. O<sub>a</sub> refers
to an oxygen at the apical position, and O<sub>e</sub> to an oxygen in
the equatorial position.

> a\) O<sub>a</sub>-P-O<sub>a</sub> b) O<sub>a</sub>-P-O<sub>e</sub>
> c)O<sub>e</sub>-P-O<sub>e</sub>

## Section 9.3: ATP, the principal phosphate donor

Thus far we have been very general in our discussion of phosphate
transfer reactions, referring only to generic 'donor' and 'acceptor'
species. It's time to get more specific. The most important donor of
phosphate groups in the cell is a molecule called **adenosine
triphosphate**, commonly known by its abbreviation **ATP**.

<img src="media/image29.emf" style="width:4.05556in;height:2.30556in" />

fig 21

Notice that there are essentially three parts to the ATP molecule: an
adenine nucleoside 'base', a five-carbon sugar (ribose), and
triphosphate. The three phosphates are designated by Greek letters α, β,
and γ, with the α phosphate being the one closest to the ribose.
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and adenosine monophosphate (AMP) are also
important players in the reactions of this chapter.

ATP is a big molecule, but the bond-breaking and bond-forming events we
will be studying in this chapter all happen in the phosphate part of the
molecule. You will see structural drawings of ATP, ADP, and AMP
abbreviated in many different ways in this text and throughout the
biochemical literature, depending on what is being illustrated. For
example, the three structures below are all abbreviated depictions of
ATP:

<img src="media/image30.emf" style="width:4.22222in;height:1.61111in" />

fig 22

The following exercise will give you some practice in recognizing
different abbreviations for ATP and other biological molecules that
contain phosphate groups.

<u>Exercise 9.6 :</u> Below are a number of representations, labeled
A-S, of molecules that contain phosphate groups. Different abbreviations
are used. Arrange A-S into groups of drawings that depict the same
species (for example, group together all of the abbreviations which
depict ATP).

<img src="media/image31.emf" style="width:4.09236in;height:1in" />

<img src="media/image32.emf" style="width:5.47222in;height:1.77778in" />

<img src="media/image33.emf" style="width:5.66667in;height:1.07431in" />

<img src="media/image34.emf" style="width:5.58333in;height:1.55556in" />

<img src="media/image35.emf" style="width:4.88889in;height:1.71319in" />

<img src="media/image36.emf" style="width:5.15764in;height:1.08333in" />

You are probably familiar with the physiological role of ATP from your
biology classes - it is commonly called 'the energy currency of the
cell'. What this means is that ATP stores energy we get from the
oxidation of fuel molecules such as carbohydrates or fats. The energy in
ATP is stored in the two high-energy phosphate anhydride linkages.

<img src="media/image37.emf" style="width:2.40764in;height:1.27778in" />

fig 23

When one or both of these phosphate anhydride links are broken as a
phosphate group is transferred to an acceptor, a substantial amount of
energy is released. The negative charges on the phosphate groups are
separated, eliminating some of electrostatic repulsion that existed in
ATP. One way to picture this is as a coil springing open, releasing
potential energy.

<img src="media/image38.emf" style="width:3.69444in;height:3.58333in" />

fig 24

In addition, cleavage of a phosphate anhydride bond means that
surrounding water molecules are able to form more stabilizing
hydrogen-bonding interactions with the products than was possible with
the starting materials, again making the reaction more 'downhill', or
exergonic.

It is important to understand that while the phosphate anhydride bonds
in ATP are *thermodynamically* unstable (they contain a great deal of
chemical energy), they are at the same time *kinetically* stable:
ATP-cleaving reactions are exothermic, but also have a high energy
barrier, making them very slow *unless catalyzed by an enzyme*. In other
words, the release of the energy contained in ATP is highly energetic
but also subject to tight control by the interaction of highly evolved
enzymes in our metabolic pathways.

ATP is a versatile phosphate group donor: depending on the site of
nucleophilic attack (at the α, β, or γ phosphorus), different phosphate
transfer outcomes are possible. Below are the three most common patterns
seen in the central metabolic pathways. A 'squigly' line in each figure
indicates the P-O bond being broken. We will study specific examples of
each of these in the coming sections.

Attack at the γ-phosphate:

<img src="media/image39.emf" style="width:3.80556in;height:2.68542in" />

Attack at the β-phosphate:

<img src="media/image40.emf" style="width:3.80556in;height:2.62986in" />

Attack at the α-phosphate:

<img src="media/image41.emf" style="width:4.19444in;height:2.75in" />

fig 24c

The common thread running through all of the ATP-dependent reactions we
will see in this section is the idea that the phosphate acceptor
molecule is undergoing a thermodynamically 'uphill' transformation to
become a more reactive species. The energy for this uphill
transformation comes from breaking a high-energy phosphate anhydride
bond in ATP. That is why ATP is often referred to as 'energy currency':
the energy in its anhydride bonds is used to 'pay for' a
thermodynamically uphill chemical step.

<u>Exercise 9.7</u>: Propose a fourth hypothetical phosphate transfer
reaction between ATP and the generic acceptor molecule in the figure
above, in which inorganic phosphate (P*i)* is a by-product.

<u>Exercise 9.8</u> : Why is this hypothetical phosphate transfer
reaction less energetically favorable compared to all of the possible
ATP-cleaving reactions shown in the figure above?

<img src="media/image42.emf" style="width:5.66667in;height:0.77778in" />

fig 24d

**  
**

## Section 9.4: Phosporylation of alcohols 

A broad family of enzymes called **kinases** catalyze transfer of a
phosphate group from ATP to an alcohol acceptor. Mechanistically, the
alcohol oxygen acts as a nucleophile, attacking the electrophilic
γ-phosphorus of ATP and expelling ADP.

Glucose is phosphorylated in the first step of the glycolysis pathway by
the enzyme hexose kinase (EC 2.7.1.1), forming glucose-6-phosphate.

Hexose kinase mechanism

<img src="media/image43.emf" style="width:5.35208in;height:5.88889in" />

[video tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K9C5OOwJN_M)

fig 26

Here is a shorthand way to depict this reaction. Notice the "ATP in, ADP
out" notation used below, indicating that ATP is one of the reactants
and ADP is one of the products. From here on, we will frequently use
this common convention to indicate reaction participants whose
structures are not drawn out in a figure.

<img src="media/image44.emf" style="width:5.43333in;height:1.71111in" />

fig 26b

The biological activity of many proteins is regulated by **protein
kinases**. In a protein kinase reaction, the side chain hydroxyl groups
on serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues of certain proteins are
phosphorylated by ATP:

<img src="media/image45.emf" style="width:3.51111in;height:1.28889in" />

fig 27

The conversion of a neutral hydroxyl group to a charged phosphate
represents a very dramatic change in the local architecture of the
protein, potentially altering its folding pattern and ability to bind to
small molecules or other proteins. A protein's biological function can
be 'switched on' by phosphorylation of a single residue, and switched
off again by removal of the phosphate group. The latter reaction we will
examine later in this chapter.

<u>Exercise 9.9</u>:

a\) Draw a curved-arrow mechanism, using abbreviations as appropriate,
for the serine kinase reaction.

b\) Threonine kinase catalyzes the phosphorylation of the side chain
hydroxyl group of threonine residues in proteins. Draw the structure,
including the configuration of all stereocenters, of a phosphothreonine
residue. Explain how you can predict the stereochemistry of the side
chain.

Although stereochemical inversion in phosphate transfer is predicted by
theory, the fact that phosphate groups are achiral made it impossible
for a long time to verify the phenomenon directly. This was finally
accomplished in the late 1970's, when a group of researchers
demonstrated phosphate inversion in kinase enzymes using chemically
synthesized ATP in which three different isotopes of oxygen were
incorporated into the γ−phosphate, thus creating a chiral phosphorus
center. *(Ann. Rev. Biochem*. **1980** *49*, 877).

<img src="media/image46.emf" style="width:5.72222in;height:1.32431in" />

fig 27a

Alcohols can be converted into organic **di**phosphates in two different
ways. A two-step process simply involves successive transfers of the
γ-phosphate groups of two ATP donors, such as in these sequential steps
in isoprenoid biosynthesis. (EC 2.7.1.36; EC 2.7.4.2). A compound called
mevalonate is diphosphorylated in this way in the early phase of the
biosynthetic pathway for cholesterol, steroid hormones, and other
isoprenoid molecules.

<img src="media/image47.emf" style="width:4.81111in;height:2.87778in" />

fig 28

The mechanism for the first phosphorylation step is analogous to that
for an alcohol kinase reaction, which we have just seen. In the second
phosphate transfer step, catalyzed by a separate enzyme, one of the
phosphate oxygens on the organic monophosphate acts as a nucleophilic
phosphate acceptor, attacking the γ-phosphate of a second ATP.

<img src="media/image48.emf" style="width:4.80556in;height:3.05556in" />

fig 29a

In some metabolic pathways, diphosphorylation occurs by a different
mechanism from the one above. Instead of sequentially transferring two
phosphates from two ATP donors, the alternate mechanism occurs in a
single step: the nucleophilic acceptor molecule attacks the β-phosphate
of ATP, rather than the γ-phosphate. After formation of the trigonal
bipyramidal intermediate, it is AMP (not ADP) which is expelled, and
what started out as the β and γ phosphates of ATP both remain with the
acceptor.

In the biosynthesis of DNA and RNA nucleotides, one of the hydroxyl
groups on ribose-5-phosphate is diphosphorylated (EC 2.7.6.1) in a
one-step mechanism:

A one-step alcohol diphosphorylation reaction (PRPP synthase):

<img src="media/image49.emf" style="width:4.16667in;height:1.26667in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image50.emf" style="width:4.21319in;height:3.55556in" />

fig 31, 31b

The metabolic role of both of the diphosphorylation processes we just
saw is to convert a hydroxyl group into a good leaving group (recall
that hydroxide ions are strong bases and poor leaving groups, while
phosphates/diphosphates, especially when stabilized in an enzyme active
site, are weak bases and very good leaving groups). In nucleoside
biosynthesis pathways, the diphosphate group of PRPP acts as a leaving
group in the very next metabolic step, which is an S<sub>N</sub>1
reaction: we have already seen this reaction in section 8.7B).

## Section 9.5: Phosphorylation of carboxylates

Thus far we have seen hydroxyl oxygens and phosphate oxygens acting as
nucleophilic accepting groups in ATP-dependent phosphate transfer
reactions. Carboxylate oxygens can also accept phosphate groups from
ATP. This typically happens in two different ways. First, the
carboxylate can attack the γ-phosphate of ATP to accept phosphate,

generates a species known as an 'acyl phosphate'. An example is the
first part of the reaction catalyzed by glutamine synthase (EC 6.3.1.2):

<img src="media/image51.emf" style="width:4.46319in;height:1.15764in" />

Alternatively, carboxylate groups are often converted into a species
referred to as an 'acyl-AMP' . Here, the carboxylate oxygen attacks the
α-phosphate of ATP leading to release of inorganic pyrophosphate. An
example is the first part of the reaction catalyzed by the enzyme
asparagine synthetase: (EC 6.3.5.4):

<img src="media/image52.emf" style="width:4.57431in;height:3.37986in" />

fig 35

<u>Exercise 9.10</u>: Draw a curved-arrow mechanism for the phosphate
transfer reaction shown below (EC 2.7.2.3), which is from the glycolysis
pathway. Note that ADP is on the reactant side and ATP is a product (the
opposite of what we have seen so far). Hint: What functional group is
the nucleophile? What functional group is the leaving group?

<img src="media/image53.emf" style="width:3.44444in;height:1.15764in" />

fig 36

## Section 9.6: Hydrolysis of organic phosphates

While kinase enzymes catalyze the phosphorylation of organic compounds,
enzymes called **phosphatases** catalyze *de*phosphorylation reactions.
**The reactions catalyzed by kinases and phosphatases are *not* the
reverse of one another:** kinases irreversibly transfer phosphate groups
from ATP (or sometimes other nucleoside triphosphates) to various
organic acceptor compounds, while *phosphatases transfer phosphate
groups from organic compounds to water*: these are *hydrolysis*
reactions. Kinase reactions involve an inherently 'uphill' step
(phosphorylation of an alcohol, for example) being paid for with an
inherently 'downhill' step (cleavage of an anhydride bond in ATP).
Phosphatase reactions, on the other hand, are thermodynamically
'downhill', and while they require an enzyme to speed them up, they do
not involve 'spending' energy currency the way kinase reactions do.

Phosphatase reaction:

<img src="media/image54.emf" style="width:4.16667in;height:0.75in" />

fig 37

There are two possible general mechanisms for a phosphatase reaction.
Some enzymes catalyze *direct* hydrolysis reactions, in which the
phosphate group is removed by direct attack of a water molecule at the
phosphate center:

Phosphatase mechanism (direct hydrolysis):

<img src="media/image55.emf" style="width:4.08333in;height:1in" />

fig 37

One of the two phosphate groups on fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is
hydrolyzed in such a way late in the gluconeogenesis pathway.
(*Biochemistry* **2000**, *39*, 8565; EC 3.1.3.11)

<img src="media/image56.emf" style="width:5.69444in;height:1.30556in" />

fig 37b

Many phosphatase reactions, however, operate by a slightly more
complicated mechanism than what is shown above. In the first phase, a
nucleophilic enzyme group (typically a cysteine, aspartate, glutamate,
or histidine side chain, designated in the figure below as 'X') attacks
the phosphate group. In the second phase, the phosphorylated residue is
hydrolized. For example, protein tyrosine phosphatase catalyzes the
dephosphorylation of phosphotyrosine residues in some proteins - this is
the other half of the regulatory 'on-off switch' that we discussed
earlier in the context of protein kinases. In the first step, the
phosphate group is directly donated to a cysteine side chain in the
phosphatase enzyme's active site. In the second step, the
phosphocysteine intermediate is cleaved by water to form inorganic
phosphate and regenerate the free cysteine in the active site.

Indirect phosphatase reaction:

Step 1:

<img src="media/image57.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.43481in" />

Step 2:

<img src="media/image58.emf" style="width:5.21319in;height:1.07431in" />

fig 38d

Notice that in the end, the phosphate group has still been transferred
to a water molecule, albeit indirectly. How would you know, just by
looking at the substrate and product of the protein tyrosine phosphatase
reaction, that the phosphate is not transferred *directly* to a water
molecule? Simply put, you *wouldn't* know this information without the
benefit of knowledge gained from biochemical experimentation.

<u>Exercise 9.11</u>: If you were to look just at the substrates and
products of a phosphatase reaction without knowing anything about the
mechanism, it is apparent that a *nucleophilic substitution* mechanism
could theoretically account for the products formed. Draw out a
hypothetical nucleophilic substitution mechanism for the hydrolysis of a
phosphoserine residue and show how researchers, by running the reaction
in H<sub>2</sub><sup>18</sup>O, (isotopically labeled water), could
potentially distinguish between a nucleophilic substitution and
phosphate group transfer mechanism by looking at where the
<sup>18</sup>O atom ends up in the products.

## Section 9.7: Phosphate diesters in DNA and RNA

Phosphate diesters play an absolutely critical role in nature - they are
the molecular 'tape' that connect the individual nucleotides in DNA and
RNA *via* a sugar-phosphate backbone. Take note of the 1' - 5' carbon
numbering shown below for the ribose sugar - these numbers will be used
frequently in the coming discussion. The 'prime' symbol (') is used to
distinguish the ribose carbon numbers from the nucleotide base carbon
numbers (which are not shown here).

<img src="media/image59.emf" style="width:3.12986in;height:2.27778in" />

fig 5

The introduction to this chapter referenced a widely-read 1987
commentary in Science Magazine, in which F.H. Westheimer of Harvard
University addressed the question of why phosphates were 'chosen' by
nature for critical biochemical job of linking DNA (*Science* **1987**,
*235*, 1173). He emphasizes how critical it is for the phosphate diester
linkage in DNA to be stable in water – in other words, it must be
resistant to spontaneous (nonenzymatic) hydrolysis. Even very infrequent
occurrence of such an undesired hydrolysis event could be disastrous for
an organism, given that an intact DNA strand is a *long-term* storage
mechanism for genetic information.

Westheimer pointed out that the inherent stability of DNA is a due in
large part to the negative charge on the non-bridging oxygen of the
phosphate diester linker, which effectively repels nucleophilic water
molecules and shields the electrophilic phosphorus atom from attack.

<img src="media/image60.emf" style="width:2.46319in;height:1.5in" />

fig 40

While DNA is quite stable with regard to spontaneous hydrolysis, it of
course can be degraded by specific *enzymatic* hydrolysis, where the
phosphate electrophile is activated for attack through noncovalent
interactions (eg. with Mg<sup>2+)</sup> in the active site. Enzymes that
hydrolyze the phosphate diester bonds in DNA are called nucleases, and
we will learn more about them in section 9.8.

Unlike DNA, RNA is quite vulnerable to spontaneous hydrolysis in aqueous
solution. This does not present a physiological dilemma, because the
function of RNA is to encode genetic information on a temporary rather
than long-term basis. Why does hydrolysis occur so much more rapidly in
RNA than in DNA? The answer has everything to do with the lowered
*entropic* barrier to the reaction (you might want to quickly review the
concept of entropy at this point). RNA nucleotides, unlike the
***deoxy***nucleotides of DNA, have a hydroxyl group at the neighboring
2' carbon. The 2' hydroxyl group is right next to the electrophilic
phosphorus atom, poised in a good position to make a nucleophilic
attack, breaking the RNA chain and forming a cyclic phosphate diester
intermediate (see figure below).

<img src="media/image61.emf" style="width:5in;height:2.12986in" />

fig 41

Researchers working with RNA have to be careful to store their samples
at very cold temperatures, preferably freeze-dried or precipitated in
ethanol, to avoid hydrolysis. The problem of RNA decomposition is
compounded by the fact that RNAase enzymes, which catalyze RNA
hydrolysis, are present on the surface of human skin and are very
stable, long-lived, and difficult to destroy.

In contrast, DNA samples can be safely stored in aqueous buffer in a
refrigerator, or in a freezer for longer-term storage.

## Section 9.8: The organic chemistry of genetic engineering

Many enzymes that catalyze reactions involving the phosphate diester
bonds of DNA have been harnessed for use in genetic engineering -
techniques in which we copy, snip, and splice DNA in order to create
custom versions of genes. The tools of genetic engineering have become
indispensable and commonplace in the past decade, and most researchers
working on the biological side of chemistry use them extensively. The
days of painstakingly purifying an enzyme from bacterial cultures or
ground-up cow livers are pretty much gone. Now scientists clone the gene
that encodes the enzyme, make any desired changes (by site-directed
mutagenesis, for example), and use a host such as *E. coli* or yeast to
produce 'recombinant' enzyme from the cloned gene. You will learn the
details of many of these procedures in a biochemistry or molecular
biology course. What we will focus on now is applying what we have
learned about phosphate group transfer reactions so that we can
recognize some of the organic chemistry that is happening in a cloning
experiment.

The first thing you have to do in a gene cloning procedure is to copy a
DNA strand. This is accomplished by an enzyme called **DNA polymerase**
(EC 2.7.7.7), which uses a single strand of DNA as a template to
synthesize a second, complementary strand (the full picture of this
complex process is well beyond the scope of this book, but recall that
we talked about the discovery of thermostable DNA polymerase in the
introduction to chapter 6).

You may have learned in a biology class that DNA is synthesized in the
3' to 5' direction. Notice below that the 3' hydroxyl group on the end
of the growing DNA strand attacks the α-phosphate of a
2'-deoxynucleoside triphosphate (dNTP), expelling inorganic
pyrophosphate.

DNA polymerase reaction:

<img src="media/image62.emf" style="width:5.55556in;height:2.57431in" />

fig 42

Scientists are able to cut DNA using 'molecular scissor' enzymes called
**restriction endonucleases** that cleave double-stranded DNA by
hydrolysis at specific base sequences.

DNA hydrolysis by restriction endonucleases:

<img src="media/image63.emf" style="width:4.83333in;height:2.94444in" />

fig 43

Notice that the result of this hydrolytic cleavage reaction is one
segment of DNA with a hydroxy group at the 3' position, and a second
segment with a phosphate group at the 5' position.

A commonly used restriction endonuclease called 'BamHI' cleaves
double-stranded DNA specifically at the following 6-base sequence:

<img src="media/image64.emf" style="width:2.60208in;height:2.36111in" />

fig 43

Notice that a 'staggered' cut is made: this is a common (and useful)
property of many endonucleases, although some make 'blunt-ended' cuts.

While an endonuclease cleaves a phosphodiester linkage in a DNA strand,
**DNA ligase** (EC 6.5.1.1) accomplishes the reverse process: it
catalyzes the formation of a new 3'-5' link between two strands:

DNA ligase reaction:

<img src="media/image65.emf" style="width:5.80556in;height:3.13889in" />

fig 45a

Note that there is initially no leaving group on the 5' phosphate of
DNA<sub>2</sub>, which makes a direct phosphate transfer reaction
impossible. The strategy employed by the DNA ligase enzyme is to first
*activate* the 5' phosphate of DNA<sub>2</sub> using ATP (phase 1
below), then the ligation reaction can proceed (phase 2)

DNA ligation

Phase 1: activation

<img src="media/image66.emf" style="width:5.26875in;height:1.75in" />

Phase 2: ligation:

<img src="media/image67.emf" style="width:5.80556in;height:3.24097in" />

One more enzymatic tool in the genetic engineering arsenal bears
mention. In some cloning procedures, a researcher may want to prevent
unwanted ligation of DNA. This can be accomplished by using the enzyme
**alkaline phosphatase** (EC 3.1.3.1), which catalyzes the
dephosphorylation of many different organic phosphates, including
5'-phosphorylated DNA (recall that we discussed phosphatases in section
9.6).

Alkaline phosphatase reaction:

<img src="media/image68.emf" style="width:5.33333in;height:1.93542in" />

fig 46

With the phosphate group removed, ligation is impossible - there is no
way to make a new phosphodiester bond without a 5' phosphate group!

**  
**

## Section 9.9: NMR of phosphorylated compounds

Because so many biological molecules contain phosphoryl groups, it is
worthwhile to look at how scientists use NMR to determine the structure
of these molecules. Recall from section 5.1 that <sup>31</sup>P, the
most abundant isotope of phosphorus, is NMR active: it can be directly
observed by <sup>31</sup>P-NMR, and indirectly observed in
<sup>1</sup>H-NMR and <sup>13</sup>C-NMR through its spin-coupling
interactions with neighboring protons and carbons, respectively.

Consider the case of isopentenyl diphosphate, the building block
molecule used by cells to make 'isoprenoid' compounds such as
cholesterol (in many animals), or β-carotene (in some plants). NMR
spectra of this molecule were taken in a D<sub>2</sub>O solvent,
buffered with ND<sub>4</sub>OD (the deuterium equivalent of aqueous
ammonium hydroxide, NH<sub>4</sub>OH) (*J. Org. Chem*. **1986**, *51*,
4768). In our discussion, carbon atoms are specified with numbers,
protons with lower case letters, and phosphorus atoms with upper case
letters.

<img src="media/image69.emf" style="width:2.97222in;height:1.50903in" />

First, let's look at the proton spectrum:

<u><sup>1</sup>H-NMR</u>

H<sub>a</sub>: 4.05 ppm (td); <sup>3</sup>J<sub>Ha-Hb</sub> = 6.6 Hz;
<sup>3</sup>J<sub>Ha-PA</sub> = 3.3 Hz.

H<sub>b</sub>: 2.39 ppm (t) <sup>3</sup>J<sub>Ha-Hb</sub> = 6.6 Hz

H<sub>c</sub>: 4.86 ppm (s)

H<sub>d</sub>: 1.77 ppm (s)

<img src="media/image70.emf" style="width:3.55556in;height:1.30556in" />

The signals for H<sub>b</sub>, H<sub>c</sub>, and H<sub>d</sub> look
like we would expect from our discussion in chapter 5, with the
exception of H<sub>c</sub> which you will be invited to discuss in the
exercise below.

Why, though, is the signal for H<sub>a</sub> split into a *triplet of
doublets* (td)? First of all, as, expected, the two neighboring
H<sub>b</sub> protons split the H<sub>a</sub> signal into a triplet,
with <sup>3</sup>J<sub>H-H</sub> = 6.6 Hz. Then, ***the signal is
further split into doublets (<sup>3</sup>J<sub>H-P</sub> = 3.3 Hz) by
P<sub>A</sub>, the closer of the two phosphorus atoms.*** A phosphorus
atom will spin-couple with protons up to three bonds away.

<u>Exercise 9.12</u>: The signal for the two 'H<sub>c</sub>' protons in
isopentenyl diphosphate is reported above as a singlet integrating to
2H. Are these two protons really chemically equivalent, and, according
to what you know about proton NMR, should this signal really be a
singlet? If not, what kind of signal(s) would you expect to see? Explain
any discrepancies between what you would expect to see and the actual
reported data.

Now, let's look at the <sup>13</sup>C spectrum of IPP:

<u><sup>13</sup>C-NMR</u> (proton-decoupled)

**C<sub>1</sub>**: 40.7 ppm (d); <sup>2</sup>J<sub>C1-PA</sub> = 7.2 Hz

**C<sub>2</sub>**: 67.0 ppm (d); <sup>3</sup>J<sub>C2-PA</sub> = 4.0 Hz

**C<sub>3</sub>**: 147.4 ppm

**C<sub>4</sub>**: 114.6 ppm

**C<sub>5</sub>**: 24.5 ppm

<img src="media/image71.emf" style="width:2.66667in;height:1.13889in" />

Notice that **the signals for both C<sub>1</sub> and C<sub>2</sub> are
split into doublets by the magnetic field of P<sub>A</sub>**. Phosphorus
atoms will spin-couple with <sup>13</sup>C nuclei up to three bonds
away. Notice also that the 2-bond coupling between C<sub>1</sub> and
P<sub>A</sub> is larger than the 3-bond coupling between C<sub>2</sub>
and P<sub>A</sub> (7.2 Hz vs. 4.0 Hz). Finally, notice that we do *not*
observe 4-bond C-P coupling: C<sub>3</sub> is not spin-coupled to
P<sub>A</sub>, and P<sub>B</sub> is not coupled to any of the
<sup>13</sup>C or <sup>1</sup>H nuclei on the molecule.

Remember that when processing a typical <sup>13</sup>C-NMR spectrum, we
electronically 'turn off' spin coupling between carbons and neighboring
protons in order to simplify the spectrum (this is referred to as
'proton decoupling'). Proton decoupling does ***not*** turn off C-P spin
coupling.

Because <sup>31</sup>P is NMR-active, we can also, with an NMR
spectrophotometer equipped with a phosphorus probe, *directly* observe
the phosphorus NMR signals, just as we can directly observe the signals
from protons and <sup>13</sup>C nuclei. On an NMR instrument where
protons resonate at 300 MHz and <sup>13</sup>C nuclei resonate at 75
MHz, phosphorus resonates at 32 MHz. In <sup>31</sup>P-NMR experiments,
the reference standard used to determine the 0 ppm point is usually
phosphoric acid (tetramethylsilane, the standard 0 ppm point for
<sup>1</sup>H- and <sup>13</sup>C-NMR, doesn't have a phosphorus atom!).
The <sup>31</sup>P-NMR spectrum of isopentenyl diphosphate has, as
expected, two peaks, each of which is *upfield* of the phosphoric acid
standard (negative chemical shifts!) and split into a doublet
(<sup>2</sup>J<sub>P-P</sub> = 20 Hz) due to 2-bond coupling between the
two phosphorus nuclei.

<img src="media/image72.emf" style="width:2.33333in;height:0.84236in" />

fig 13

P<sub>A</sub>: (-)11.03 ppm (d, <sup>2</sup>J<sub>P-P</sub> = 20 Hz)

P<sub>B</sub>: (-)7.23 ppm (d, <sup>2</sup>J<sub>P-P</sub> = 20 Hz)

Notice that although the C<sub>1</sub> and C<sub>2</sub> signals were
split by P<sub>A</sub> in our <sup>13</sup>C-NMR spectrum, in the
<sup>31</sup>P-NMR spectrum the converse is not true: the P<sub>A</sub>
signal is *not* split by C<sub>1</sub> or C<sub>2</sub>. Both of these
carbons are NMR-inactive <sup>12</sup>C isotope in 99 out of 100
molecules. In addition, P-H splitting is not observed in this
<sup>31</sup>P spectrum, because proton decoupling is in effect.

## Key concepts to review

All of the reactions detailed in this chapter involved the transfer of a
phosphate group - usually a phosphate, diphosphate, or AMP group - from
one molecule (the donor) to another (the acceptor). Your learning goal
for this chapter is to recognize and understand what is happening in
these phosphate group transfer reactions, and to gain a basic
understanding of the chemistry of phosphate and other phosphate groups.

Be sure that you can identify and provide examples of the following
terms:

| inorganic phosphate     | organic triphosphate         |
|-------------------------|------------------------------|
| inorganic phosphate     | phosphate (mono)ester        |
| inorganic pyrophosphate | phosphate diester            |
| organic (mono)phosphate | phosphate anhydride          |
| organic diphosphate     | bridging/non-bridging oxygen |

Also, make sure that you can recognize and use appropriately the various
abbreviations introduced in this chapter:

P*i* PP*i* R-OP

R-OPP R-OAMP ATP

ADP AMP

. . . in addition to the various structural abbreviations for adenosine
mono-, di-, and triphosphate.

You should know the approximate pKa values for phosphoric acid and an
organic monophosphate, and be able to state the approximate net charge
(to the nearest 0.5 charge unit) of these species in buffers of
different pH levels.

You should be able to describe, in words and pictures, the tetrahedral
*sp<sup>3</sup>d* bonding picture for the phosphorus atom of a phosphate
group. *Even though the geometry is not always shown in every drawing,
always keep in mind that the phosphate group is tetrahedral.*

You should be able to draw resonance contributors for different
phosphate groups, identify major versus minor contributors, and explain
why some are major and some are minor. *Remember - charges are shared
between non-bridging oxygens, even if they are not drawn that way!*

***Absolutely critical to your success with this chapter is being able
to picture and illustrate the mechanistic pattern which we refer to as a
phosphate group transfer.***

Though not usually included in reaction illustrations, always remember
that charge-charge interactions with magnesium ions and hydrogen bonds
to active site amino acids both serve to increase the electrophilicity
of a phosphorus atom in donor compounds such as ATP.

You should understand the distinctions between the three mechanistic
models for phosphate transfer reactions - concerted,
addition-elimination, and elimination-addition - and know that the
concerted model probably most closely describes biochemical reactions.

You should be able to identify the apical and equatorial positions in
the pentavalent transition state of a phosphate transfer reaction, and
recognize that the reaction results in inversion at the phosphorus
center.

You should be able to identify the α, β, and γ phosphate groups of ATP,
as well as the ribose and adenosine parts of the molecule.

You should be able to explain how ATP acts as a phosphate group donor,
and why such reactions are thermodynamically favorable.

You should be able to draw a curved-arrow mechanism for reactions in
which ATP acts as a phosphate group donor in the phosphorylation and/or
diphosphorylation of an alcohol. You should be able to predict the
result of nucleophilic attack at the α, β, or γ phosphates of ATP.

In general, you should be able to propose a likely mechanism for any
phosphate transfer reaction, given the starting compounds and products.

Given information about the existence of a covalently linked
enzyme-substrate complex in an enzyme mechanism, you should be able to
propose a likely mechanism that accounts for such an intermediate. For
example, after being told that the phosphotyrosine phosphatase reaction
involves a phosphocysteine intermediate, you should be able to propose a
mechanism.

## Problems

*In all of the problems that follow, feel free to use appropriate
abbreviations when drawing structures. However, always be sure **not**
to abbreviate regions of a structure which are directly involved in
bond-breaking or bond-forming events.*

**P9.1:** Draw a likely mechanism for reaction catalyzed by shikimate
kinase (EC 2.7.1.71) in the aromatic amino acid biosynthesis pathway).
Stereochemistry of the product is not indicated in the figure below - in
your mechanism, show the stereochemistry of the product, and explain how
you are able to predict it from your knowledge of kinase reactions.

<img src="media/image73.emf" style="width:4.18542in;height:1.19444in" />

**P9.2:** Draw a likely mechanism for the following reaction (EC
2.7.2.3) in the gluconeogenesis pathway, and predict what compound is
indicated by the question mark.

<img src="media/image74.emf" style="width:3.47222in;height:0.85208in" />

**P9.3:**

a\) Draw a likely mechanism for the following reaction (EC 6.3.4.2) from
ribonucleotide biosynthesis. Hint: what is the nucleophilic group? How
could the enzyme increase it's nucleophilicity?

<img src="media/image75.emf" style="width:4.05556in;height:1.83333in" />

b\) Draw a mechanism for the following reaction, also from
ribonucleotide biosynthesis (EC 6.3.3.1):

<img src="media/image76.emf" style="width:3.94444in;height:1.33333in" />

**P9.4:**

a\) The carboxylate group on the amino acid valine is activated in an
early step in the biosynthesis of the antibiotic penicillin. Predict the
product of this reaction, and draw the likely intermediate of the
phosphate group transfer reaction.

<img src="media/image77.emf" style="width:1.87986in;height:1.05556in" />

**P9.5:** The reaction below is an early step in the synthesis of
tyvelose, a sugar found on the surface of some pathogenic bacteria.
Notice that CTP plays the role of the phosphate group donor in this
case, rather than ATP.

<img src="media/image78.emf" style="width:4.05556in;height:1.02778in" />

Draw a mechanism for the reaction, and indicate the second product that
is released by the enzyme. (*J. Biol. Chem*. **2005**, *280*, 10774)

**P9.6:** Draw the likely product of the following hypothetical
phosphate group transfer reactions. Specify which phosphate group of ATP
is the electrophile in each case.

a\)

<img src="media/image79.emf" style="width:1.46319in;height:0.58333in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image80.emf" style="width:1.47222in;height:0.58333in" />

**P9.7:** The figure below illustrates an experiment in which a reaction
catalyzed by an *E. coli* enzyme was run in isotopically labeled water.

<img src="media/image81.emf" style="width:4.10208in;height:1.02778in" />

a\) The researchers concluded that the reaction was *not* a phosphate
group transfer. Explain their reasoning.

b\) Draw the products that would be expected if the reaction actually
did proceed by a phosphate transfer mechanism (be sure to show
stereochemistry and the location of the <sup>18</sup>O atom).
(Biochemistry 2000, 39, 8603)

**P9.8:** The reaction below proceeds with a *direct* attack by a water
molecule on the substrate, but the hydrolysis could be expected to
proceed through two possible mechanisms. Draw two possible mechanisms
for the reaction run in H<sub>2</sub><sup>18</sup>O. Trace the progress
of the <sup>18</sup>O 'label' throughout each mechanism to see where it
ends up: this should indicate to you how the two mechanisms could be
(and in fact were!) distinguished experimentally.

<img src="media/image82.emf" style="width:3.24097in;height:1.08333in" />

**P9.9:** Glucose-6-phosphate is dephosphorylated to glucose in the last
step of the gluconeogenesis pathway (EC 5.3.1.9). The reaction is not a
direct hydrolysis: like the phosphotyrosine phosphatase reaction we saw
in this chapter it involves formation of a phosphoenzyme intermediate,
but in this case the enzyme residue acting as the initial phosphate
acceptor is an active site *histidine* rather than an asparate. Given
this information, propose a likely mechanism for the reaction.

**P9.10:** (*This question assumes a basic knowledge of DNA structure
and the idea of supercoiling*). DNA topoisomerase enzymes catalyze the
temporary 'nicking' of one strand of double-stranded DNA, which allows
supercoiled DNA to 'unwind' before the nicked strand is re-ligated.
During the unwinding process, the 5' end of the nicked strand is
transferred to a tyrosine in the enzyme's active site, effectively
holding it in place while the 3' end rotates. Overall, the
stereochemical configuration of the bridging phosphate is retained.
Propose a likely mechanism for this nicking and re-ligating process.
(*Biochemistry* **2005**, *44*, 11476.)

**P9.11:** Pictured below is a series of phosphate group transfer steps
in the early part of isoprenoid biosynthesis in bacteria. With the
knowledge that the atoms in green are derived from ATP, predict the
structures of compounds A, B and C. (EC 2.7.7.60, EC 2.7.1.148, EC
4.6.1.12)

<img src="media/image83.emf" style="width:5.38889in;height:1.12986in" />

**P9.12**: The reaction below shows the synthesis of glucose-UDP, an
important intermediate in carbohydrate biosynthesis. Notice that UTP
(instead of ATP) is the phosphate donor. Identify the by-product denoted
below by a question mark.

*Molecules and Cells* **2010**, *29*, 397; E.C. 2.7.7.9

<img src="media/image84.emf" style="width:4.44444in;height:1.05556in" />

**P9.13:** Isomerization of 3-phosphoglycerate to 2-phosphoglycerate (EC
5.4.2.1, a reaction in glycolysis) has been shown to occur with the
participation of a phosphohistidine residue in the enzyme's active site.
The two phosphate groups are distinguished in the figure below by color.
With this information, propose a mechanism for the reaction. (*J. Mol.
Bio*l. **1999**, *286*, 1507

<img src="media/image85.emf" style="width:4.43542in;height:2.62986in" />

**P9.14**: The gluconeogenesis (sugar-building) pathway enzyme
glucose-6-phosphatase catalyzes an *indirect* phosphate hydrolysis
reaction with a phosphohistidine intermediate ('indirect hydrolysis' in
this context means that a water molecule does *not* directly attack
glucose-6-phosphate).

<img src="media/image86.emf" style="width:4.52778in;height:1.12986in" />

Researchers wanted to confirm that the hydrolysis in this reaction is
indirect, rather than direct. It turns out that the same enzyme is also
capable of catalyzing the transfer of the phosphate group from
glucose-6-phosphate to the hydroxyl group on carbon \#6 of another
glucose molecule (instead of to water, which is the natural reaction).
The enzyme-catalyzed transfer of phosphate between two glucose
substrates is reversible.

The researchers incubated the enzyme with labeled glucose-6-phosphate,
in which in the phosphate center was chiral (with the *R* configuration)
due to the incorporation of <sup>17</sup>O and <sup>18</sup>O isotopes.
They also included a high concentration of glucose in the reaction
mixture, which ensured that the glucose-to-glucose transfer reaction
predominated and hydrolysis (the 'natural' reaction) did not take place.
After allowing the reaction to reach equilibrium, they isolated the
glucose-6-phosphate and looked at the configuration of the phosphate
group.

Given what you have just learned about the enzyme mechanism, predict
what the researchers found in this experiment, explain your prediction,
and draw the appropriate structure(s), including stereochemistry. Assume
that the glucose-to-glucose mechanism is identical to the hydrolysis
mechanism, aside from the identity of the ultimate phosphate acceptor.
*Biochem J.,* **1982***, 201,* 665*.*

# Chapter 10: Nucleophilic addition to carbonyl groups

<img src="media/image87.jpeg" style="width:6in;height:4in" />

(photo credit: https://www.flickr.com/photos/gzlu/)

## Introduction

It's possible that the fuel for the car you drive thirty years from now
will come from the back end of a panda. Not literally, of course – but
it just might turn out that future biofuel technology will be derived in
part from the stuff that workers have to clean out of the enclosure
housing Ya Ya and Le Le, the two resident pandas at the Memphis Zoo in .
At least, that's the hope of Dr. Ashli Brown, a biochemistry professor
at Tennessee State University.

First, a little background. If you are like most people in the United
States, you are already burning ethanol every time you drive: in 2012,
the U.S. Department of Energy reports that over 13 million gallons of
ethanol were sold at gas stations nationwide, most often as a 10%
mixture along with 90% conventional gasoline. The ethanol we burn today
is made by fermenting the sugars present in edible corn. The use of corn
ethanol, while a significant step forward in the effort to move away
from petroleum fuels and towards carbon-neutral, renewable energy
sources, is far from a permanent, sustainable solution to the world's
ever-increasing energy needs. Growing corn crops requires a lot of
energy and expense, from running the large equipment used to plow and
harvest the fields, to manufacturing and applying pesticides and
fertilizers, all the way to trucking the corn to the ethanol plant. In
fact, some calculation methods suggest that more energy goes into
producing a gallon of corn-based ethanol than is released when the
ethanol is burned.

Moreover, growing corn requires a lot of water, and takes up land which
otherwise could be used for growing food, or preserved as a natural
habitat. A recent study by scientists in South Dakota reported that
between 2006 and 2011, a full 1.3 million acres of wetland and prairie
were plowed over and converted to biofuel crop production in five
midwestern states.

What would be much better in the long run is if we could produce ethanol
or other biofuels not from resource-intensive food crops like corn, but
from non-edible plant materials: grasses, trees, and agricultural
byproducts such as the cobs and stalks from corn plants. Switchgrass,
for example, is a native North American prairie grass that is thought to
have high potential for biofuel production.

So if we can make ethanol from corn, couldn't we just change over to
switchgrass using the same technology?

Unfortunately, it's not nearly that simple. Ethanol is made by 'feeding'
glucose to living yeast cells, allowing them to break down the sugar
into ethanol – a metabolic process called fermentation. Corn kernels
contain sugar in the form of starch, a polysaccharide of linked glucose
molecules. Enzymes called 'amylases' are used to break up the starch
polymer into individual glucose molecules (as well as two-glucose units
called cellobiose), which are then fermented by the yeast.

<img src="media/image88.emf" style="width:2.65764in;height:2.65764in" />

fig1b

The rest of the corn plant – the stalks, leaves, and cobs – is composed
in large part of another glucose polymer called cellulose.

<img src="media/image89.emf" style="width:3.58333in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 1c

Cellulose is a major component of plant cell walls, and is the most
abundant organic compound on the planet - an enormous source of glucose
for fermentation! The problem, from a renewable energy perspective, is
how to get at the glucose monomers that make up the polymer. Look
closely at the bond connecting two glucose monomers in starch, and then
compare it to the same bond in cellulose. They both link the same two
carbons of glucose, but with opposite stereochemistry. Recall that
enzymes are very sensitive to the stereochemical configuration of their
substrate molecules. It should come as no surprise, then, that the
amylase enzymes which are so efficient at breaking apart starch are
completely ineffective at breaking apart cellulose. Other enzymes, known
as cellulases, are needed for this job. These enzymes do exist in
nature: just think about what happens to tree branches, leaves, and
other cellulose-rich plant matter that lies on the forest floor. These
slowly rot away, the cellulose broken apart by cellulase enzymes in
microscopic fungi.

The key word here, though, is 'slowly'. Fungi living on the forest floor
are not in any great hurry to degrade the leaves and wood around them –
the cellulose is not going anywhere. Fungal cellulases are,
comparatively speaking, very slow, inefficient enzymes. Herein lies the
biggest challenge to the development of economically viable production
of ethanol from cellulosic sources such as switchgrass or wood. Breaking
the glucose-glucose bonds in cellulose is the main bottleneck in the
whole process.

This is where the pandas come in.

Pandas live primarily on a diet of bamboo, obtaining their energy from
the cellulose in the plant. Like other plant-eaters such as cows,
horses, and sheep, pandas do not make their own cellulase enzymes.
Rather, they rely on a diverse population of symbiotic microbes
inhabiting their digestive tracts to do the job of cellulose digestion
for them. Unlike the microbes living the slow-paced lifestyle of the
forest floor, though, the panda's microbes don't have a lot of time to
spare - the food is moving through the system pretty quickly. In theory,
evolutionary pressure should have resulted in panda-gut microbes with
speedy cellulase enzymes, and that is what Dr. Ashli Brown at Tennessee
State was hoping to find as she and her research students analyzed panda
feces from the Memphis Zoo. They have had some success: at the fall,
2013 meeting of the American Chemical Society, Dr. Brown announced that
her group, working in cooperation with colleagues at the University of
Wisconsin, had found over forty cellulose-digesting bacteria, courtesy
of Ya Ya and Le Le. The next step is to clone the cellulase- encoding
genes, use the DNA to produce recombinant enzyme, and see just how fast
they are.

Other less cuddly and photogenic animals are also being studied with
similar goals in mind. Dr. Falk Warnecke, working at the U.S. Department
of Energy Joint Genome Institute in Northern California, has been
investigating the microbes that live in the guts of wood-eating
termites, and many other researchers around the world are interested in
the symbiotic bugs which inhabit the rumen of cows and sheep.

The problematic chemical reaction catalyzed by cellulase enzymes is, in
organic chemistry terminology, an 'acetal hydrolysis'. Acetals are
derived from aldehydes. The reactions that occur at the carbonyl carbon
of aldehydes and ketones is absolutely central to the chemistry of
carbohydrates such as starch and cellulose, and it is this chemistry
that is the subject of the chapter we are about to begin.

## Section 10.1 Nucleophilic addition to aldehydes and ketones: an overview

### 10.1A: The aldehyde and ketone functional groups

Recall from chapter 1 that the ketone functional group is made up of a
carbonyl bonded to two carbons, while in an aldehyde one (or both) of
the neighboring atoms is a hydrogen.

<img src="media/image90.emf" style="width:1.51875in;height:0.85208in" />

fig1d

You probably are familiar with the examples shown below: acetone, the
simplest ketone compound, is the solvent in nail polish remover,
benzaldehyde is the flavoring in maraschino cherries, and formaldehyde
(a special case in which the carbonyl carbon is bonded to hydrogens on
both sides) is the nasty-smelling stuff that was used to preserve the
unlucky frog that you dissected in high school biology class. The male
sex hormone testosterone contains a ketone group in addition to alcohol
and alkene groups.

<img src="media/image91.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.68542in" />

fig 1e

Recall from chapter 2 the bonding picture in a ketone or aldehyde: the
carbonyl carbon is *sp<sup>2</sup>* hybridized, with its three trigonal
planar *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals forming σ bonds with orbitals on the
oxygen and on the two carbon or hydrogen atoms. The remaining
unhybridized *2p* orbital is perpendicular to the plane formed by the
*sp2* orbitals, and forms a π bond through a side-by-side overlap with a
*2p* orbital on the oxygen. The σ and *p* bonds between the carbon and
oxygen combine to make the C=O double bond that defines the carbonyl
functionality.

<img src="media/image92.emf" style="width:5.16667in;height:1.10208in" />

fig 1

### 10.1B: Nucleophilic addition

The carbon-oxygen double bond is polar: oxygen is more electronegative
than carbon, so electron density is higher on the oxygen end of the bond
and lower on the carbon end. Recall that bond polarity can be depicted
with a dipole arrow (A in the figure below), or by showing the oxygen as
bearing a partial negative charge and the carbonyl carbon a partial
positive charge (B).

<img src="media/image93.emf" style="width:3.60208in;height:1.26875in" />

fig 2

A third way to illustrate the carbon-oxygen dipole (C in the figure
above) is to consider the two main resonance contributors: the major
form, which is what you typically see drawn in Lewis structures, and a
minor but very important contributor in which both electrons in the π
bond are localized on the oxygen, giving it a full negative charge. The
latter depiction shows the carbon with an empty *2p* orbital and a full
positive charge.

However the bond polarity is depicted, the end result is that the
carbonyl carbon is electron-poor - in other words, it is an
electrophile. In addition, the trigonal planar geometry means that the
carbonyl group is unhindered). Thus, it is an excellent target for
attack by an electron-rich nucleophilic group, a mechanistic step called
**nucleophilic addition**:

Nucleophilic addition to an aldehyde or ketone (enzymatic)

<img src="media/image94.emf" style="width:5.13889in;height:2.57431in" />

fig 3

Notice the acid-base catalysis that is going on in this generalize
mechanism: in the enzyme active site, a basic group is poised to
deprotonate the nucleophile (thus enhancing its nucleophilicity) as
begins to attack the carbonyl carbon, while at the same time an acidic
proton on another active site group is poised just above the carbonyl
oxygen (thus enhancing the electrophilicity of the carbon), ready to
protonate the oxygen and neutralize any negative charge that builds up.

### 10.1C: Stereochemistry of nucleophilic addition to a carbonyl

Recall from section 3.11B that when the two groups adjacent to a
carbonyl are not the same, we can distinguish between the *re* and *si*
'faces' of the planar structure.

The concept of a trigonal planar group having two distinct faces comes
into play when we consider the stereochemical outcome of a nucleophilic
addition reaction. Notice that in the course of a carbonyl addition
reaction, the hybridization of the carbonyl carbon changes from
*sp<sup>2</sup>* to *sp<sup>3</sup>*, meaning that the bond geometry
changes from trigonal planar to tetrahedral. If the two R groups are not
equivalent, then a chiral center is created upon addition of the
nucleophile. The configuration of the new chiral center depends upon
which side of the carbonyl plane the nucleophile attacks from.

<img src="media/image95.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.98205in" />

fig 4

If the reaction is catalyzed by an enzyme, the stereochemistry of
addition is (as you would expect) tightly controlled, and leads to one
stereoisomer exclusively- the nucleophilic and electrophilic substrates
are bound in specific positions within the active site, so that attack
must occur specifically from one side and not the other. Nonenzymatic
reactions of this type often result in a 50:50 mixture of stereoisomers,
but it is also possible that one stereoisomer may be more abundant,
depending on the structure of the reactants and the conditions under
which the reaction takes place. We'll see some examples of this
phenomenon soon when we look at cyclic forms of sugar molecules.

## Section 10.2: Hemiacetals, hemiketals, and hydrates

### 10.2A: Overview

One of the most important examples of a nucleophilic addition reaction
in biochemistry, and in carbohydrate chemistry in particular, is the
addition of an alcohol to a ketone or aldehyde. When an alcohol adds to
an aldehyde, the result is called a **hemiacetal**; when an alcohol adds
to a ketone the resulting product is a **hemiketal**.

<img src="media/image96.emf" style="width:3.38889in;height:2.58333in" />

fig 5

(The prefix ‘*hemi’* (half) is used in each term because, as we shall
soon see, addition of a second alcohol nucleophile can occur, resulting
in species called **acetals** and **ketals**.)

The conversion of an alcohol and aldehyde (or ketone) to a hemiacetal
(or hemiketal) is a reversible process. The generalized mechanism for
the process at physiological pH is shown below.

Biochemical mechanism of hemiacetal formation:

<img src="media/image97.emf" style="width:4.02778in;height:1.52778in" />

fig 6

In general, hemiacetals (and hemiketals) are higher in energy than their
aldehyde-alcohol components, so the equilibrium for the reaction lies to
the left. As we will soon see in the context of glucose and other
sugars, however, five- and six-membered *cyclic* hemiacetals are
considerably lower in energy, and are favored at equilibrium: recall
from chapter 3 the inherent stability of five- and six-membered rings.

Aldehydes and ketones, when in aqueous solution, exist in equilibrium
with their **hydrate** form. A hydrate forms as the result of a water
molecule adding to the carbonyl carbon of the aldehyde or ketone.

<img src="media/image98.emf" style="width:3.80556in;height:0.94444in" />

fig 6a

Although you should be aware that aldehyde and ketone groups may exist
to a considerable extent in their hydrated forms when in aqueous
solution (depending upon their structure), they are usually drawn in
their non-hydrated form for the sake of simplicity.

The mechanism we just saw for hemiacetal formation applies to
biochemical reactions occurring at physiological pH. In the organic
laboratory, however, hemiacetal and hemiketal formation usually takes
place in the presence of a strong acid. The acid catalyzes the reaction
by protonating the carbonyl oxygen, thus increasing the electrophilicity
of the carbonyl carbon. Notice in the mechanism below that highly acidic
intermediates are drawn which would be unreasonable to propose for the
corresponding biochemical mechanisms occurring at physiological pH.

Acid-catalyzed hemiacetal formation (non-biological):

<img src="media/image99.emf" style="width:5.65764in;height:1.55556in" />

fig 6b

### 10.2B: Sugars as intramolecular hemiacetals and hemiketals 

As stated above, the reactions of hemiacetals and hemiketals are central
to the chemistry of carbohydrates. Recall that sugar molecules generally
contain either an aldehyde or a ketone functional group, in addition to
multiple alcohol groups. Aldehyde sugars are often referred to as
**aldoses**; ketone sugars as **ketoses**. For example, glucose is an
aldose, and fructose is a ketose - their structures are drawn below in
Fischer projection:

<img src="media/image100.emf" style="width:2.25in;height:1.94444in" />

fig 8

<u>Exercise 10.1</u>: What term describes the *relationship* between
glucose and fructose (in other words, what kind of isomers are they)?

Glucose and fructose are shown above in their open-chain form. However,
recall from section 1.3C that in aqueous solution, glucose, fructose,
and other sugars of five or six carbons rapidly interconvert between
straight-chain and cyclic forms. This occurs through the formation of
*intramolecular* hemiacetals and hemiketals. This simply means that the
'R' group of the alcohol is already covalently attached to the 'R 'group
of the aldehyde (R<sub>1</sub> in our general mechanism).

<img src="media/image101.emf"
style="width:2.57431in;height:1.43542in" />

fig 9a

Unlike most of the biochemical reactions you will see in this text,
sugar cyclization reactions *are not catalyzed by enzymes*: they occur
spontaneously and reversibly in aqueous solution. For most five- and
six-carbon sugars, the cyclic forms predominate in equilibrium.

The cyclic form of glucose is a six-membered ring, with an
intramolecular hemiacetal formed by attack of the hydroxl on carbon \#5
to the aldehyde carbon (carbon \#1, also called the **anomeric carbon**
in carbohydrate terminology).

<img src="media/image102.emf"
style="width:5.12986in;height:4.80556in" />

fig 9

The cyclic form of glucose is called **glucopyranose**. As was discussed
above, nucleophilic attack on a planar carbonyl group can occur at
either face of the plane, leading to two different stereochemical
outcomes - in this case, to two different diastereomers. In carbohydrate
nomenclature, these two diastereomers are referred to as the α and β
**anomers** of glucopyranose.

Because the formation of glucopyranose occurs spontaneously without
enzyme catalysis, shouldn’t equal amounts of these two anomers form? In
fact, this does not happen: there is almost twice as much of one anomer
than the other at equilibrium. Why is this? Remember (section 3.2) that
six-membered rings exist predominantly in the chair conformation, and
that the lower energy chair conformation is that in which unfavorable
interactions between substituents are minimized – in most cases, this is
the conformation in which larger substituents are in the *equatorial*
position. In the lower-energy chair conformation of the major β anomer
of glucopyranose, all of the hydroxyl groups are in the equatorial
position, but in the minor α anomer one hydroxyl group is forced into
the axial position. As a result, the α anomer is higher in energy, and
less abundant at equilibrium.

<img src="media/image103.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.22268in" />

fig 10

<u>Exercise 10.2</u>: Draw a mechanism for the conversion of
α-glucopyranose to open-chain glucose.

Fructose in aqueous solution forms a six-membered cyclic hemiketal
called **fructopyranose** when the hydroxyl oxygen on carbon \#6 attacks
the ketone carbon (carbon \#2, the anomeric carbon in fructose).

<img src="media/image104.emf"
style="width:5.12986in;height:4.12986in" />

fig 11

In this case, the β anomer is heavily favored in equilibrium by a ratio
of 70:1, because in the minor α anomer the bulkier CH<sub>2</sub>OH
group occupies an axial position.

Notice in the above figure that the percentages of α and β anomers
present at equilibrium do not add up to 100%. Fructose also exists in
solution as a *five*-*membered* cyclic hemiketal, referred to in
carbohydrate nomenclature as **fructofuranose**. In the formation of
fructofuranose from open-chain fructose, the hydroxyl group on the
*fifth* carbon attacks the ketone.

<img src="media/image105.emf"
style="width:4.49097in;height:3.82431in" />

fig 12)

In aqueous solution, then, fructose exists as an equilibrium mixture of
70% β-fructopyranose, 23% β-fructofuranose, and smaller percentages of
the open chain and cyclic α-anomers. The β-pyranose form of fructose is
one of the sweetest compounds known, and is the main component of
high-fructose corn syrup. The β-furanose form is much less sweet.

Although we have been looking at specific examples for glucose and
fructose, other five- and six-carbon monosaccharides also exist in
solution as equilibrium mixtures of open chais and cyclic hemiacetals
and hemiketals. Shorter monosaccharides are unlikely to undergo
analogous ring-forming reactions, however, due to the inherent
instability of three and four-membered rings.

<u>Exercise 10.3</u>:

a\) Identify the anomeric carbon of each of the sugars shown below, and
specify whether the structure shown is a hemiacetal or hemiketal.

b\) Draw mechanisms for cyclization of the open-chain forms to the
cyclic forms shown.

<img src="media/image106.emf"
style="width:3.13889in;height:1.22222in" />

fig 12a

## Section 10.3: Acetals and ketals

### 10.3A: Overview

Hemiacetals and hemiketals can react with a second alcohol nucleophile
to form an acetal or ketal. The second alcohol may be the same as the
first (ie*.* if R<sub>2</sub> = R<sub>3</sub> in the scheme below), or
different.

<img src="media/image107.emf"
style="width:3.93542in;height:0.99097in" />

fig 13

Although we focus here on biological reactions, it is instructive in
this case to consider non-biological acetal-forming reactions before we
look at their biochemical counterparts. In a non-enzymatic context,
acetal/ketal formation - just like hemiacetal/hemiketal formation - is
generally catalyzed by a strong acid.

Acid-catalyzed acetal formation (non-biological)

<img src="media/image108.emf"
style="width:4.82431in;height:3.97222in" />

fig 18b

The role of the acid catalyst is to protonate the OH group of the
acetal, thus making it a good leaving group (water). Notice something
important here***: the conversion of a hemiacetal to an acetal is simply
an S<sub>N</sub>1 reaction, with an alcohol nucleophile and water
leaving group.*** The carbocation intermediate in this S<sub>N</sub>1
mechanism is stabilized by resonance due to the oxygen atom already
bound to the electrophilic carbon.

Below are some examples of simple, non-biological acetal and ketals.

<img src="media/image109.emf"
style="width:5.11111in;height:1.43542in" />

fig

13a

<u>Exercise 10.4</u>: For each acetal/ketal A-D in the figure above,
specify the required aldehyde/ketone and alcohol starting materials.

<u>Exercise 10.5</u>: Categorize each of the following molecules as a
hemiacetal, hemiketal, acetal, ketal, hydrate of an aldehyde, or hydrate
of a ketone.

<img src="media/image110.emf"
style="width:3.60208in;height:2.57431in" />

fig 15c

<u>Exercise 10.6:</u> Specify the acetal/ketal that would form from a
reaction between the given starting compounds.

<img src="media/image111.emf"
style="width:2.94444in;height:1.62986in" />

fig 15d

<u>Exercise 10.7</u>: Specify the aldehyde/ketone and alcohol
combination that would be required to form the compounds in exercise
10.5.

### 10.3B: Glycosidic bond formation

Now, let's consider acetal formation in a biochemical context. A very
important example of the acetal/ketal group in biochemistry is the
glycosidic bonds which link individual sugar monomers to form
polysaccharides (see section 1.3C for a quick review). Look at the
glycosidic bond between two glucose monomers in a cellulase chain:

<img src="media/image112.emf"
style="width:4.26875in;height:1.97222in" />

fig 16

If you look carefully, you should recognize that carbon \#1, the
anomeric carbon on the left-side glucose monomer, is the central carbon
of an acetal group. Biochemists refer to this as a β-1,4 linkage,
because the stereochemistry at carbon \#1 is β in the specialized
carbohydrate nomenclature system, and it is linked to carbon \#4 of the
next glucose on the chain. The vast structural diversity of
carbohydrates stems in large part from the different linkages that are
possible - both in terms of which two carbons are linked, and also the
stereochemistry of the linkage. You will see many more variations of
glycosidic bond linkage patterns if you study carbohydrate biochemistry
in greater depth.

Reactions in which new glycosidic bonds are formed are catalyzed by
enzymes called **glycosyltransferases**, and in organic chemistry terms
these reactions represent the conversion of a hemiacetal to an acetal
(remember that sugar monomers in their cyclic form are hemiacetals and
hemiketals). The mechanism for glycosidic bond formation in a living
cell parallels the acid-catalyzed (non-biological) acetal-forming
mechanism, with an important difference: rather than being protonated,
*the OH group of the hemiacetal is converted to a good leaving group by
phosphorylation* (this is a pattern that we are familiar with from
chapters 9 and 10). The specific identity of the activating phosphate
group varies for different reactions, so it is generalized in the figure
below.

Mechanism for (biochemical) acetal formation:

Hemiacetal activation phase:

<img src="media/image113.emf"
style="width:3.66667in;height:1.13889in" />

acetal formation phase:

<img src="media/image114.emf"
style="width:4.68542in;height:2.51875in" />

fig 18

> Step A (Activation phase): This phase of the reaction varies according
> to the particular case, but always involves phosphate group transfer
> steps that are familiar from chapter 9. What is most important for our
> present discussion, however, is simply that the hydroxyl group on the
> hemiacetal has been activated - ie. made into a good leaving group -
> by phosphorylation.
>
> Step 1: Now that the leaving group has been activated, it does its job
> and leaves, resulting in a resonance stabilized carbocation.
>
> Step 2: A nucleophilic alcohol on the growing cellulose chain attacks
> the highly electrophilic carbocation to form an acetal. Here is where
> the stereochemistry of the new glycosidic bond is determined:
> depending on the reaction, the alcohol nucleophile could approach from
> either side of the planar carbocation.

To reiterate: it is important to recognize the familiar S<sub>N</sub>1
mechanistic pattern in play here: in step A, a poor leaving group is
converted into a good leaving group, in step 1 the leaving group leaves
and a stabilized carbocation is left behind, and in step 2 a nucleophile
attacks to form a new bond and complete the substitution process. Look
back at the S<sub>N</sub>1 reactions we saw in chapter 8 if you are
having trouble making this mechanistic connection.

Now, let's look specifically at the glycosyl transferase reaction
mechanism in which a new glycosidic bond is formed on a growing
cellulose chain. Glucose (a hemiacetal) is first activated through two
enzymatic phosphate transfer steps: step A1, a phosphate isomerization
reaction with a mechanism similar to the reaction in problem P9.13,
followed by a UTP-dependent step A2, for which you were invited to
propose a mechanism in problem P9.12.

<img src="media/image115.emf"
style="width:5.66667in;height:3.87986in" />

fig 19a

The UDP group on glucose-UDP then leaves (step 1 below), forming a
resonance-stabilized carbocation intermediate. Attack by the alcohol
group on the growing cellulose chain in step 2 forms the glycosidic
(acetal) bond. Note the inversion of stereochemistry. *Mol. Plant*
**2011**, *4*, 199

<img src="media/image116.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.63354in" />

fig 19

### 10.3C: Glycosidic bond hydrolysis

Acetals can be hydrolyzed back to hemiacetals. Notice that an acetal to
hemiacetal conversion is an S<sub>N</sub>1-type reaction with a water
nucleophile and an alcohol leaving group.

Mechanism for acetal hydrolysis (enzyme-catalyzed):

<img src="media/image117.emf"
style="width:5.22222in;height:2.35208in" />

fig 20

In step 1, an alcohol is protonated by a nearby acid group as it breaks
away to form a resonance-stabilized carbocation intermediate. The
carbocation is attacked by a nucleophilic water molecule in step 2 to
form a hemiacetal.

The general mechanism above applies to reactions catalyzed by
**glycosidase** enzymes, which catalyze the cleavage of glycosidic bonds
in carbohydrates. In the introduction to this chapter, we learned about
ongoing research in the field of cellulosic ethanol. Recall that the
main bottleneck in the production of ethanol from sources such as
switchgrass or wood is the **cellulase**-catalyzed step in which the
glycosidic bonds in cellulose are cleaved. Cellulose-digesting microbes
have several different but closely related forms of cellulase enzymes,
all working in concert to cleave cellulose into smaller and smaller
pieces until individual glucose molecules are free to be converted to
ethanol by the fermentation process. Below is a representative mechanism
for a cellulase reaction.

Cellulase mechanism:

<img src="media/image118.emf" style="width:5.75in;height:6.12986in" />

fig 21

The starch-digesting amylase enzymes used in the corn ethanol production
process catalyze similar glycoside hydrolysis reactions, the main
difference being the opposite stereochemistry at the anomeric carbon of
the substrate.

<u>Exercise 10.8</u>: Notice that the cellulose glycososide
bond-*forming* reaction requires the cell to 'spend' a high-energy UTP
molecule, but the cellulase glycoside bond-*breaking* reaction does not.
Use your knowledge of chemical thermodynamics to explain this
observation.

<u>Exercise 10.9</u>: Below is the structure of the artificial sweetener
sucralose. Identify the two anomeric carbons in the disaccharide.

<img src="media/image119.emf"
style="width:2.11111in;height:1.68542in" />

<u>Exercise 10.10</u>: Robinose is a disaccharide found in 'Chenille
Plant', a flowering shrub native to the Pacific Islands.

<img src="media/image120.emf"
style="width:2.22222in;height:1.69444in" />

fig 21c

a\) Identify the two anomeric carbons and the glycosidic bond in
robinose.

b\) Using the same carbon numbering system as for glucose in the earlier
figure, fill in in the carbon numbers (#1 through \#6) for each of the
monosaccharides that make up robinose.

c\) Based on what you know of glycosidic bond-forming reactions in
nature, propose a reasonable mechanism for the linking of the two
monosaccharides, starting with the activated hemiacetal species,
assuming that it is a UDP species as in the cellulose gycosidic
bond-forming reaction.

d\) Draw the open chain form of each of the monosaccharides

<u>Exercise 10.11</u>: Look again at the structures of the two-glucose
fragments of cellulose and amylose shown the introduction to this
chapter. A structural feature of the cellulose polymer makes it
inherently more resistant to enzymatic hydrolysis compared to starch.
Explain. (Hint: think about intermolecular interactions.)

**  
**

## Section 10.4: *N*-glycosidic bonds

We have just seen that when a second alcohol attacks a hemiacetal or
hemiketal, the result is an acetal or ketal, with the glycosidic bonds
in carbohydrates providing a biochemical example. But if a hemiacetal is
attacked not by a second alcohol but by an amine, what results is a kind
of ‘mixed acetal’ in which the anomeric carbon is bonded to one oxygen
and one nitrogen.

<img src="media/image121.emf" style="width:0.75in;height:0.76875in" />

fig 22a

This arrangement is referred to by biochemists as an ***N*-glycosidic
bond.** You may recognize these as the bonds in nucleosides and
nucleotides that link the G, C, A, T, or U base to the sugar.

<img src="media/image122.emf"
style="width:2.30556in;height:2.36111in" />

fig 22

The formation of *N*-glycosidic bonds in ribonucleotides is closely
analogous to the formation of glycosidic bonds in carbohydrates – again,
it is an S<sub>N</sub>1-like process with an activated water leaving
group. Typically, the hemiacetal is activated by diphosphorylation, as
illustrated in step A of the general mechanism below.

Mechanism for formation of an *N-*glycosidic bond:

<img src="media/image123.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.14973in" />

fig 22b

The starting point for the biosynthesis of purine (G and A)
ribonucleotides is a five-carbon sugar called ribose-5-phosphate, which
in solution takes the form of a cyclic hemiacetal. The critical
*N*-glycosidic bond is established through substitution of
NH<sub>3</sub> for OH at the anomeric carbon of the ribose. The anomeric
OH group is first activated (step A below) to form an activated
intermediate called phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP). The inorganic
pyrophosphate then leaves to generate a resonance-stabilized carbocation
(step 1) which is attacked by a nucleophilic ammonia in step 2 to
establish the *N*-glycosidic bond.

<img src="media/image124.emf" style="width:6in;height:4.02329in" />

fig 23

With the *N*-glycosidic bond in place, the rest of the purine base is
assembled piece by piece by other biosynthetic enzymes.

(The mechanism above should look familiar - we saw step A in chapter 9
as an example of alcohol diphosphorylation , and steps 1 and 2 in
chapter 8 as an example of a biochemical S<sub>N</sub>1 reaction).

Establishment of the *N*-glycosidic bond in biosynthesis of the
pyrimidine ribonucleotides and (U, C and T) also begins with PRPP, but
here the ring structure of the nucleotide base part of the biomolecule
has already been 'pre-fabricated' in the form of orotate:

<img src="media/image125.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.58582in" />

fig 23a

<u>Exercise 10.12</u>: We have just seen an illustration of the
formation of an *N*-glycosidic bond in a biosynthetic pathway. In the
catabolic (degradative) direction, an *N*-glycosidic bond must be
broken, in a process which is analogous to the hydrolysis of a
glycosidic bond (illustrated earlier). In the catabolism of guanosine
nucleoside, the *N*-glycosidic bond is broken by inorganic phosphate
(not water!) apparently in a *concerted* (S<sub>N</sub>2-like)
displacement reaction (*Biochemistry* **2011**, *50*, 9158). Predict the
products of this reaction, and draw a likely mechanism.

<img src="media/image126.emf"
style="width:2.85208in;height:1.86111in" />

<u>Exercise 10.13</u>: Glycoproteins are proteins that are linked, by
glycosidic or *N*-glycosidic bonds, to sugars or carbohydrates through
an asparagine, serine, or threonine side chain on the protein. As in
other glycosylation and *N*-glycosylation reactions, the hemiacetal of
the sugar must be activated prior to glycosidic bond formation. Below is
the structure of the *activated* sugar hemiacetal substrate in an
asparagine glycosylation reaction. (*Nature* **2011**, *474*, 350)

<img src="media/image127.emf"
style="width:4.83333in;height:1.97222in" />

fig 21a

Draw the product of the asparagine glycosylation reaction, assuming
inversion of configuration of the anomeric carbon.

**  
**

## Section 10.5: Imines and iminium ions

The electrophilic carbon atom of aldehydes and ketones can be the target
of nucleophilic attack by amines as well as alcohols. The end result of
attack by an amine nucleophile is a functional group in which the C=O
double bond is replaced by a C=N double bond, and is known as an
**imine.** (An equivalent term is **'Schiff base'**, but we will use
'imine' throughout this book). Recall from section 7.5B that imines have
a pK<sub>a</sub> of approximately 7, so at physiological pH they can be
accurately drawn as either protonated (**iminium** **ion** form) or
neutral (imine).

Iminium ion formation

<img src="media/image128.emf"
style="width:2.93542in;height:1.02778in" />

Mechanism (enzymatic):

<img src="media/image129.emf"
style="width:4.82431in;height:1.63889in" />

fig 25

Mechanistically, the formation of an imine involves two steps. First,
the amine nitrogen attacks the carbonyl carbon in a nucleophilic
addition step (step 1) which is closely analogous to hemiacetal and
hemiketal formation. Based on your knowledge of the mechanism of acetal
and ketal formation, you might expect that the next step would be attack
by a second amine to form a compound with a carbon bound to two amine
groups – the nitrogen version of a ketal or acetal. Instead, what
happens next (step 2 above) is that the nitrogen lone pair electrons
‘push’ the oxygen off of the carbon, forming a C=N double bond (an
iminium) and a displaced water molecule.

The conversion of an iminium back to an aldehyde or ketone is a
hydrolytic process (bonds are broken by a water molecule), and
mechanistically is simply the reverse of iminiom formation:

Hydrolysis of an iminium ion:

<img src="media/image130.emf"
style="width:2.55556in;height:0.86111in" />

Mechanism (enzymatic):

<img src="media/image131.emf"
style="width:5.02778in;height:1.88889in" />

fig 26

Carbon-carbon bond forming enzymes called aldolases (which we'll cover
in detail in chapter 12) often form iminium links between a carbonyl
carbon on a substrate and a lysine residue from the active site of the
enzyme, as in this aldolase reaction from the Calvin Cycle:

<img src="media/image132.emf"
style="width:4.46319in;height:1.65764in" />

fig 27

After the carbon-carbon bond forming part of an aldolase reaction is
completed, the iminium linkage is hydrolyzed, freeing the product so
that it can diffuse out of the active site and allow another catalytic
cycle to begin.

In chapter 17, we will learn about reactions that are dependent upon a
coenzyme called pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), also known as vitamin
B<sub>6</sub>. In these reactions, the aldehyde carbon of PLP links to
an enzymatic lysine in the active site:

<img src="media/image133.emf"
style="width:4.83333in;height:1.97222in" />

fig 27c

Then, the PLP-lysine imine linkage is traded for an imine linkage
between PLP and the amino group on the substrate, in what can be
referred to as a **transimination**.

<img src="media/image134.emf"
style="width:3.79653in;height:3.90764in" />

The mechanism for a transimination is very similar to that of imine
formation:

Transimination reaction:

<img src="media/image135.emf"
style="width:4.21319in;height:0.76875in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image136.emf"
style="width:5.58333in;height:2.83333in" />

fig 27e

<u>Exercise 10.14:</u> Draw an imine that could be formed between each
pair of compounds.

a\)

<img src="media/image137.emf"
style="width:1.51875in;height:0.83333in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image138.emf"
style="width:2.09722in;height:0.83333in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image139.emf"
style="width:1.83333in;height:0.87986in" />

fig 28a

<u>Exercise 10.15</u>: Draw the imminium hydrolysis product for each of
the following compounds.

<img src="media/image140.emf" style="width:5.5in;height:0.87986in" />

fig 28b

<u>Exercise 10.16</u>:

a\) The metabolic intermediate shown below undergoes an intramolecular
imine formation as a step in the biosynthesis of lysine (EC 4.3.3.7).
Draw the product of this intramolecular imine formation step.

<img src="media/image141.emf" style="width:2.75in;height:0.85208in" />

fig 27a

b\) Predict the product of this iminium hydrolysis step (EC 2.3.1.117)
from the proline degradation pathway.

<img src="media/image142.emf"
style="width:1.71319in;height:0.76875in" />

## Section 10.6: A look ahead: addition of carbon and hydride nucleophiles to carbonyls

We have seen in this chapter a number of reactions in which oxygen and
nitrogen nucleophiles add to carbonyl groups. Other nucleophiles are
possible in carbonyl addition mechanisms: in chapters 12 and 13, for
example, we will examine in detail some enzyme-catalyzed reactions where
the attacking nucleophile is a resonance stabilized carbanion (usually
an enolate ion):

<img src="media/image143.emf"
style="width:3.63889in;height:2.82431in" />

fig 28

Then in chapter 15, we will see how the carbonyl groups on aldehydes and
ketones can be converted to alcohols through the nucleophilic addition
of what is essentially a hydride (H<sup>-</sup>) ion.

<img src="media/image144.emf"
style="width:2.63889in;height:1.11111in" />

fig 29

##  Key concepts for review

Before moving on to the next chapter, you should be confident in your
ability to:

Recognize aldehyde and ketone groups in organic biomolecules

Draw/explain the bonding picture for aldehyde and ketone groups

Explain why the carbonyl carbon in an aldehyde or ketone is
electrophilic

Draw complete curved arrow mechanisms for the following reaction types:

formation of a hemiacetal/hemiketal

collapse of a hemiacetal/hemiketal to revert to an aldehyde/ketone

formation and hydrolysis of an acetal/ketal

formation and hydrolysis of an *N*-glycosidic bond

formation and hydrolysis of an imine

transimination

Explain how the carbocation intermediates in glycosidic bond formation
and hydrolysis reactions are stabilized by resonance

Explain the stereochemical considerations of a nucleophilic addition to
an aldehyde/ketone, especially in the context of glycosidic bond
formation. Be able to identify the *re* and *si* faces of an aldehyde,
ketone, or imine.

In addition to these fundamental skills, you should develop your
confidence in working with end-of-chapter problems involving more
challenging, multi-step biochemical reactions.

## Problems

**P10.1** Draw a mechanism showing the formation of an imine linkage
between a lysine side chain and α-ketobutyrate (this is the first step
in the degradation of lysine, EC 1.5.1.8).

<img src="media/image145.emf"
style="width:1.55556in;height:1.07431in" />

**P10.2:** Draw four possible cyclic hemiketal isomers of the compound
below.

<img src="media/image146.emf"
style="width:1.22222in;height:1.22222in" />

**P10.3:** A downstream intermediate in the lysine degradation pathway
undergoes imine hydrolysis to release two amino acid products (EC
1.5.1.1). Draw a mechanism for this hydrolysis reaction, and show the
structures of the two products formed.

<img src="media/image147.emf"
style="width:3.66667in;height:0.94444in" />

**P10.4:** Below is the structure of lactose, the sugar found in dairy
products.

<img src="media/image148.emf" style="width:3in;height:1.57431in" />

Lactose is a disaccharide of galactose and glucose. People who are
lactose intolerant do not produce enough lactase - the enzyme that
hydrolyzes the glycosidic bond linking the two monosaccharides - to be
able to fully digest dairy products.

a\) Draw a likely stabilized carbocation intermediate in the hydrolysis
reaction catalyzed by lactase.

b\) Draw, in the chair conformation, the structure of what you predict
would be the most abundant form of the galactose monosaccharide in
aqueous solution.

c\) Is galactose an aldose or a ketose?

d\) Draw, showing sterochemistry, the open-chain form of galactose.

**P10.5:** You probably know that ascorbic acid (vitamin C) acts as an
antioxidant in the body. When vitamin C does its job, it ends up being
oxidized to dehydroascobate, which is usually drawn as shown below, in
the so-called tricarbonyl form.

<img src="media/image149.emf"
style="width:1.27778in;height:1.22222in" />

Evidence suggests, however, that the most important form of
dehydroascorbate in a physiological context is one in which one of the
ketone groups is in its hydrated form, and the other is an
intramolecular hemiketal (see *Chemical and Engineering News*, Aug. 25,
2008, p. 36). Show the structure of this form of dehydroascorbic acid.

**P10.6:** The compound below is the product of a ring-opening imine
hydrolysis step in the degradation pathway for proline, one of the amino
acids. Draw the structure of the starting compound.

<img src="media/image150.emf"
style="width:1.13889in;height:0.87986in" />

**P10.7:** The rearrangement below was proposed to proceed via imine
formation followed by nucleophilic substitution. Propose a mechanism
that fits this description. (J. Biol. Chem. 280, 12858, scheme 2 part 2)
.

<img src="media/image151.emf"
style="width:3.66667in;height:1.62986in" />

**P10.8:** The biochemical acetal-forming reactions we learned about in
this chapter all require activation of the hemiacetal through
phosphorylation. In the organic synthesis lab, non-enzymatic
acetal-forming reactions are carried out with a catalytic amount of
strong acid, which serves to activate the hemiacetal. Predict the
product of the following acetal forming reaction, and propose a
reasonable mechanism for the reaction. Remember that the reaction is
carried out under acidic conditions, which means that the protonation
state of intermediates will be different than biochemical reactions
occurring at neutral pH.

<img src="media/image152.emf" style="width:2.75in;height:0.85208in" />

*Problems 9-15 all involve variations on, and combinations of, the
nucleophilic addition steps that we studied in this chapter. Although
the reactants and/or products may look somewhat different from the
simpler aldehydes, acetals, imines, etc. that we used as examples in the
chapter, the key steps still involve essentially the same mechanistic
patterns. Before attempting these problems, you may want to review
**tautomerization** reactions in section 7.6.*

**P10.9:** The final step in the biosynthesis of inosine monophosphate
(IMP, a precursor to both AMP and GMP), is a ring-closing reaction in
which a new nitrogen-carbon bond (indicated by an arrow in the structure
below) is formed. Predict the starting substrate for this reaction, and
propose a mechanism that involves a slight variation on typical imine
formation. (EC 3.5.4.10)

<img src="media/image153.emf"
style="width:3.46319in;height:1.77778in" />

**P10.10:** Propose a mechanism for these steps in nucleotide
metabolism:

a\) (EC 3.5.4.5)(

<img src="media/image154.emf"
style="width:2.65764in;height:1.40764in" />

b\) (EC 3.5.4.4)

<img src="media/image155.emf"
style="width:3.21319in;height:1.37986in" />

**P10.11**

a\) Draw the structure (including stereochemistry) of the compound that
results when the cyclic hemiketal shown below coverts to an open-chain
compound with two ketone groups.

<img src="media/image156.emf"
style="width:1.91667in;height:1.13889in" />

b\) The compound shown below undergoes a ring-opening reaction to form a
species that can be described as both an enol and an enamine. Draw the
structure (including stereochemistry) of this product, and a likely
mechanism for its formation. (EC 5.3.1.24)

<img src="media/image157.emf"
style="width:2.27778in;height:1.04653in" />

**P10.12:** Tetrahydrofolate (THF) is a coenzyme that serves as a
single-carbon donor in many biochemical reactions. Unlike
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM, see section 8.8), the carbon being
transferred in a THF-dependent reaction is often part of a carbonyl.
Below is a reaction in the histidine degradation pathway (EC 3.5.3.8).
The mechanism involved is thought to be an transimination, followed by a
imine-to-imine tautomerization, followed by an imine hydrolysis. Propose
a reasonable mechanism that fits this description. *Hint*: first
identify the carbon atom being transferred.

<img src="media/image158.emf"
style="width:4.19444in;height:2.80556in" />

**P10.13:** Hydrazones are close relatives of imines, formed in
reactions between aldehydes/ketones and hydrazines, a functional group
containing a nitrogen-nitrogen bond. The mechanism for hydrazone
formation is analogous to that of imine formation.

Guanafuracin, a known antibiotic compound, is a hydrazone, and can be
prepared easily in the laboratory by combining equimolar amounts of the
appropriate aldehyde and hydrazine in water (no heat or acid catalyst is
required, and the reaction is complete in seconds).

Determine the starting materials required for the synthesis of
guanafuracin, and propose a likely mechanism for the reaction.

<img src="media/image159.emf"
style="width:4.02778in;height:3.11111in" />

**P10.14:** Propose reasonable mechanisms for the following steps from
the histidine biosynthesis pathway, and predict the structure of
intermediate A (which is open-chain, not cyclic).

<img src="media/image160.emf"
style="width:5.05556in;height:2.29653in" />

***The last several problems are quite challenging!***

**P10.15:** Propose a likely mechanism for the synthesis of glucosamine
6-phosphate from fructose-6-phosphate. One of several intermediates is
shown. (EC 2.6.1.16.)

<img src="media/image161.emf" style="width:4.75in;height:3.18542in" />

**P10.16 :** α-chloromethyl ketones (structure below) are effective
irreversible inhibitors of proteolytic (peptide-bond breaking) enzymes
such as chymotrypsin. In these enzymes, a nucleophilic serine plays a
key role in the reaction. The mechanism for inactivation of
α-chymotrypsin is thought to involve, as a first step, nucleophilic
attack by the active site serine on the carbonyl of the inhibitor.
However, when the inactivated enzyme is analyzed, an active site
histidine rather than the serine, is found to be covalently modified by
the inhibitor. The structure of the modified histidine is shown below.
The mechanism of inactivation is thought to involve an epoxide
intermediate - with this in mind, propose a reasonable mechanism of
inactivation.

<img src="media/image162.emf"
style="width:2.51389in;height:1.81944in" />

**P10.17:** An enzyme in *E. coli* bacteria catalyzes the hydrolysis of
α-glucose-GDP to glucose.

<img src="media/image163.emf" style="width:3.80556in;height:1.25in" />

<sup>1</sup>H-NMR analysis of the reaction in progress showed the
initial appearance of a doublet at 4.64 ppm with J = 7.9 Hz (the
spectrum contained other signals as well, of course). After 20 minutes
(at which point the hydrolysis reaction has been complete for some
time), another doublet began to appear slightly downfield, this one with
J = 4.0 Hz. Over time, the strength of the downfield signal gradually
increased and that of the upfield signal gradually decreased, until they
stabilized at constant levels.

Draw a mechanism for the enzymatic hydrolysis reaction, and correlate
your mechanism to the NMR data (including the appearance of the second
doublet).

**C11.4:** Arginine deaminase, an enzyme in the arginine degradation
pathway, catalyzes the transformation of (L)-arginine to (L)-citrulline
via a covalent substrate-cysteine intermediate.

<img src="media/image164.emf"
style="width:4.69444in;height:2.79167in" />

This enzyme is the target for the development of drugs for cancer and
immunological diseases such as arthritis. However, rather than
completely and permanently shutting down the enzyme (eg. with an
irreversible inhibitor), researchers are looking for a way to
temporarily 'turn down' the activity of the enzyme. One strategy that
has recently been reported involves the use of an oxygen-containing
arginine analog, called canavanine, which reacts in the same way as
arginine except that the second (hydrolysis) step is very slow. While
the enzyme is covalently attached to the inhibitor (in the S-alkyl
thiuronium stage), it is inactivated.

a\) Show a mechanism for the reaction catalyzed by arginine deaminase.

b\) Explain how the electronic effect of the oxygen substituent would
slow down the hydrolysis step of the reaction, and why the rate of the
hydrolysis step is more affected by the oxygen substitution than the
S-alkylthiuronium-forming step.

# Chapter 11**:** Nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions

<img src="media/image165.jpg"
style="width:1.76573in;height:3.35048in" />

## Introduction

> The 26th of *July*, Notice is given to the Sheriffs, that in the
> Street of *Lescalle*, a Part of the old Town inhabited only by poor
> People, Fifteen Persons are suddenly fallen sick: They dispatch
> thither Physicians and Surgeons; they examine into the Distemper, and
> make Report; some, that 'tis a Malignant Fever; others, a contagious
> or pestilential Fever, occasioned by bad Food, which Want had long
> forced those poor Creatures to live upon . . .
>
> The 27th, Eight of those Sick dye; the Sheriffs themselves go to their
> Houses to cause them to be searched; Buboes \[*swelling of the lymph
> nodes*\] are found on Two of them: The Physicians and Surgeons still
> hold the same Language, and impute the Cause of the Distemper to
> unwholsome Food. Notwithstanding which, as soon as Night comes, M.
> *Moustier* repairs to the Place, sends for Servants from the
> Infirmaries, makes them willingly or by Force, take up the Bodies,
> with all due Precautions; they are carried to the Infirmaries, where
> they are buried with Lime; and all the rest of the Night he causes the
> remaining Sick, and all those of their Houses, to be removed to the
> Infirmaries.
>
> The 28th, very early in the Morning, Search is made every where for
> those who had Communication with them, in order to confine them: Other
> Persons in the same Street fall sick, and some of those who first
> sicken'd dye. ..
>
> The People who love to deceive themselves, and will have it absolutely
> not to be the Plague, urge a Hundred false Reasons on that Side. Would
> the Plague, say they, attack none but such poor People? Would it
> operate so slowly?
>
> Let them have but a few Days Patience, and they will see all attacked
> without Distinction, with the swiftest Rage, and the most dreadful
> Havock, that ever was heard of.

(source: Gutenberg Project

http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45673/45673-h/45673-h.htm)

In late May of 1720, a ship arrived in the Mediterranean port city of
Marseille, having recently departed from Cyprus and Tripoli. Although
several crew members had fallen ill and died during the journey, the
ship was allowed to unload after only a very brief quarantine, the
result of political pressure on port authorities from local businessmen
who wanted quick access to the valuable silk and cotton waiting in the
ship's hold.

Along with silk and cotton, the hold carried rats. The rats, in turn,
carried fleas. The fleas carried a microscopic mass murderer: *Yersinia
pestis*, the species of bacteria that causes bubonic plague.

It is next to impossible to estimate how many people have died from
bubonic plague over the course of human history. In the time of the
'Black Death' in the 14<sup>th</sup> century, it wiped out more than
half the population of Europe. In the Great Plague of Marseille in 1720,
over 100,000 people succumbed to *Y. pestis* infection in the city and
surrounding provinces. At the height of the outbreak, corpses piled up
in city streets, and a fortified wall, the '*mur de la peste*' was
constructed in an attempt to prevent people from traveling north to the
neighboring city of Aix.

Throughout history, bacteria have been the cause of untold human death
and suffering, making the threat posed by more obviously frightening
species - lions and bears, spiders and snakes – seem inconsequential by
comparison. As recently as the mid-1940s, a minor cut or cold could
become a life-threatening event if a bacterial infection were to set in,
and even in developed countries, one in twenty infants did not survive
to celebrate their first birthday.

Since then, the infant mortality rate in developed countries has
declined by a factor of ten. You probably don't worry very much when a
small cut on your hand becomes infected. The idea of half of the
population of the United States dying in a plague is, in most people's
minds, the stuff of zombie movies, not reality. Bacteria are, for now at
least, no longer public enemy \#1.

How did this happen?

For an answer, we move to a September morning in 1928, in the laboratory
of Alexander Fleming, a Scottish bacteriologist working at St. Mary's
Hospital in London. As a young man serving in the British Medical Corps
during World War I, Fleming saw first-hand how deadly bacteria could be,
as he watched countless soldiers in his battlefield hospital die from
infected wounds. After returning to civilian life, he began to study
*Staphylococci* bacteria, a common source of life-threatening infections
in humans, hoping to discover new antibacterial agents that were more
effective than those he had used in the war. He spent a lot of his time
growing *Staphylococcus* cultures in petri dishes for his experiments,
and, notoriously untidy, he tended to leave piles of culture dishes
lying around his lab. One morning, he returned from a short vacation to
find that one of the cultures he had left out had some mold growing on
it. He was about to throw it away, but happened to notice something
curious: surrounding the small spot of mold was a circle of clear
medium, where no bacteria were growing. He realized that the mold must
be secreting something that killed bacteria.

As it turned out, the mold was a of strain called *Penicillium notatum*,
and the 'something' killing the bacteria was an organic compound that
came to be known as penicillin.

<img src="media/image166.emf"
style="width:1.56667in;height:1.54444in" />

Fleming published his findings in the *British Journal of Experimental
Pathology*, but made only passing reference to the potential therapeutic
value of penicillin. The paper received little attention.

Fast-forward now to early February 1941, with the world once again at
war. One morning, a policeman named Albert Alexander living in Oxford,
England, had an unfortunate gardening accident. While he was trimming
some roses on his day off, his shears slipped and gave him a nasty cut
on the side of his mouth. The cut became infected, and after a few days
it appeared as if the infection would kill him. Then, he got a visit in
his hospital room from some chemists at nearby Oxford University.

For the last few years, the chemists had been hard at work isolating
pure penicillin from mold cultures, a tricky job because the compound
tends to degrade during purification. It is a feat that Alexander
Fleming -who, after all, was a bacteriologist, not a chemist - had never
been able to accomplish, but the Oxford researchers had realized how
valuable penicillin might be to the war effort, and had finally met with
some success. They needed a human subject on whom to test the ability of
their compound to treat infected wounds, and Albert was their man for
the job. They injected him with penicillin, and within a day his
infection cleared up. It was a new day in the history of medicine.

At the heart of a penicillin molecule is an amide functional group -
more specifically, a *cyclic* amide, or 'lactam'. To understand how
penicillin works at the molecular level as it prevents bacteria from
multiplying, we first need to know more about the chemistry of amides
and other carboxylic acid derivative functional groups, and a type of
organic reaction mechanism called 'nucleophilic acyl substitution'.
Understanding the reactivity of carboxylic acid derivative groups will
also allow us to appreciate why penicillin is so prone to degradation,
and why - very significantly for all of us - the era of not having to
worry about bacterial infections may be near an end, as common toxic
bacterial species such as *Staphylococcus* develop increasingly robust
resistance to antibiotics.

**Section 11.1: Carboxylic acid derivatives**

The functional groups at the heart of this chapter are called
**carboxylic acid derivatives**: they include carboxylic acids
themselves, carboxylates (deprotonated carboxylic acids), amides,
esters, thioesters, and acyl phosphates.

<img src="media/image167.emf" style="width:4.5in;height:2.2in" />

fig 1

*Cyclic* esters and amides are referred to as **lactones** and
**lactams**, respectively.

<img src="media/image168.emf" style="width:1.93333in;height:1.2in" />

fig 2a

Carboxylic acid anyhydrides and acid chlorides, which also fall under
the carboxylic acid derivative category, are not generally found in
biomolecules but are useful intermediates in laboratory synthesis. They
are discussed in a section on laboratory reactions at the end of this
chapter.

<img src="media/image169.emf"
style="width:1.98889in;height:1.05556in" />

fig 2

Carboxylic acid derivatives can be distinguished from aldehydes and
ketones by the presence of a group containing an electronegative
heteroatom - usually oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur – bonded directly to
the carbonyl carbon. You can think of a carboxylic acid derivative as
having two sides. One side is the **acyl** group, which is the carbonyl
plus the attached alkyl (R) group. In the specific cases where R is a
hydrogen or methyl, chemists use the terms **formyl** and **acetyl**
group, respectively. One the other side is the heteroatom-linked group:
in this text, we will sometimes refer to this component as the ‘acyl X'
group (this, however, is *not* a standard term in organic chemistry).

<img src="media/image170.emf"
style="width:4.74097in;height:0.85208in" />

fig 3

Notice that the acyl X groups are simply deprotonated forms of other
functional groups linked to the acyl group: in an amide, for example,
the acyl X group is an amine, while in an ester the acyl X group is an
alcohol.

<img src="media/image171.emf"
style="width:3.32431in;height:1.94444in" />

ig 4

<u>Exercise 11.1</u>: What is the ‘acyl X’ group in:

a\) an acid anhydride?

b\) a thioester?

c\) a carboxylic acid?

d\) an acyl phosphate?

<u>Exercise 11.2</u>: Draw the structures indicated:

a\) compound A after is has been acetylated (ie. an acetyl group added)

b\) compound B after it has been formylated

c\) compound C after it has been formylated

d\) Compound D after it has been acetylated

<img src="media/image172.emf"
style="width:5.21111in;height:1.48889in" />

'Fatty acid' molecules such as stearate are carboxylates with long
carbon chains for acyl groups.

<img src="media/image173.emf"
style="width:3.87778in;height:0.81111in" />

fig 5

The aromas of many fruits come from small ester-containing molecules:

<img src="media/image174.emf" style="width:5.37778in;height:1in" />

fig 6

The 'peptide bonds' that link amino acids together in proteins are
amides.

<img src="media/image175.emf" style="width:2in;height:1.21111in" />

fig 7

Acetyl-Coenzyme A, a very important two carbon (acetyl group) 'building
block' molecule in metabolism, is characterized by reactions at its
thioester functional group:

<img src="media/image176.emf"
style="width:5.77778in;height:2.02778in" />

fig 8

<u>Exercise 11.3</u>: There are two amide groups in acetyl-CoA: identify
them.

<u>Exercise 11. 4</u>: Name all carboxylic acid derivative groups in the
molecules below.

<img src="media/image177.emf"
style="width:5.72222in;height:3.10208in" />

fig 8a

**Section 11.2: The nucleophilic acyl substitution mechanism**

The fact that one of the atoms adjacent to the carbonyl carbon in
carboxylic acid derivatives is an electronegative heteroatom – rather
than a carbon like in ketones or a hydrogen like in aldehydes - is
critical to understanding the reactivity of carboxylic acid derivatives.
The most significant difference between a ketone/aldehyde and a
carboxylic acid derivative is that the latter has a potential leaving
group - what we are calling the 'acyl X group' - bonded to the carbonyl
carbon.

<img src="media/image178.emf"
style="width:4.87986in;height:1.79653in" />

fig 9a

As a result, carboxylic acid derivatives undergo **nucleophilic acyl
substitution** reactions, rather than nucleophilic additions like
ketones and aldehydes.

A nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction starts with nucleophilic
attack at the carbonyl, leading to a tetrahedral intermediate (step 1
below). In step 2, the tetrahedral intermediate collapses and the acyl X
group is expelled, usually accepting a proton from an enzymatic acid in
the process.

Mechanism for a nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction:

<img src="media/image179.emf"
style="width:5.05556in;height:1.27778in" />

fig 9

Notice that in the product, the nucleophile becomes the new acyl X
group. This is why this reaction type is called a nucleophilic acyl
*substitution*: one acyl X group is substituted for another. For
example, in the reaction below, one alcohol 'X group' (methanol),
substitutes for by another alcohol 'X group' (3-methyl-1-butanol) as one
ester is converted to another.

<img src="media/image180.emf"
style="width:5.88889in;height:1.15556in" />

fig 10

Another way of looking at this reaction is to picture the *acyl* group
being transferred from one acyl X group to another: in the example
above, the acetyl group (in green) is transferred from
3-methyl-1-butanol (blue) to methanol (red). For this reason,
nucleophilic acyl substitutions are also commonly referred to as **acyl
transfer** reactions.

Enzymes catalyzing nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions have evolved
ways to stabilize the negatively charged, tetrahedral intermediate, thus
lowering the activation energy of the first, rate-determining step
(nucleophilic attack). The late transition state of the first step
resembles the tetrahedral intermediate that results: recall from chapter
6 that the Hammond postulate tells us that anything that stabilizes the
tetrahedral intermediate will also stabilize the transition state. In
many cases, for example, enzymatic amino acid residues are positioned in
the active site so as to provide stabilizing hydrogen bond donating
interactions with the negatively-charged oxygen. This arrangement is
sometimes referred to in the biochemistry literature as an **oxanion
hole**. The figure below shows a tetrahedral intermediate stabilized by
hydrogen bond donation from two main chain (amide) nitrogen atoms.

<img src="media/image181.emf"
style="width:2.25556in;height:1.55556in" />

fig 9b

### 

<u>Section 11.3:</u> The relative reactivity of carboxylic acid
derivatives

In carboxylic acid derivatives, the partial positive charge on the
carbonyl carbon is stabilized by electron donation from nonbonding
electrons on the adjacent heteroatom, which has the effect of decreasing
electrophilicity.

<img src="media/image182.emf"
style="width:4.47222in;height:2.12986in" />

fig 11

Among the carboxylic acid derivatives, carboxylate groups are the least
reactive towards nucleophilic acyl substitution, followed by amides,
then carboxylic esters and carboxylic acids, thioesters, and finally
acyl phosphates, which are the most reactive among the biologically
relevant acyl groups. Acid anhydrides and acid chlorides are laboratory
reagents that are analogous to thioesters and acyl phosphates, in the
sense that they too are highly reactive carboxylic acid derivatives.
Section 11.8 near the end of this chapters includes information about
the chemistry of these two reagents.

Relative reactivity of carboxylic acid derivatives:

<img src="media/image183.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.91087in" />

fig 12

The reactivity trend of the carboxylic acid derivatives can be
understood by evaluating the basicity of the leaving group (acyl X
group) - remember from section 8.4 that *weaker bases are better leaving
groups*. A thioester is more reactive than an ester, for example,
because a thiolate (RS<sup>-)</sup> is a weaker base and better leaving
group than an alcoxide (RO<sup>-</sup>). Recall from chapter 7 that the
pKa of a thiol is about 10, while the pKa of an alcohol is 15 or higher:
a stronger conjugate acid means a weaker conjugate base.

In general, if the incoming nucleophile is a weaker base than the ‘acyl
X’ group that is already there, it will also be the better leaving
group, and thus the first nucleophilic step will simply reverse itself
and we’ll get the starting materials back:

<img src="media/image184.emf"
style="width:5.12986in;height:1.26875in" />

fig 13

In general, acyl substitution reactions convert higher energy carboxylic
acid derivatives into derivatives of lower energy. Thioesters, for
example, are often converted directly into carboxylic esters in
biochemical reactions, but not the other way around. To go 'uphill' -
from a carboxylate to a thioester, for example, requires the 'coupling'
of the uphill reaction to an energetically favorable reaction. We will
see how this works in the next section.

### Section 11.4: Acyl phosphates 

Acyl phosphates, because they are so reactive towards acyl
substitutions, are generally seen as reaction intermediates rather than
stable metabolites in biochemical pathways. Acyl phosphates usually take
one of two forms: a simple acyl monophosphate, or acyl-adenosine
monophosphate.

<img src="media/image185.emf"
style="width:4.15556in;height:2.01111in" />

fig 14

Both forms are highly reactive to acyl substitution reactions, and are
often referred to as ‘**activated acyl groups**’ or ‘**activated
carboxylic acids**’ for reasons that will become clear soon. The
tendency of phosphates to form stabilizing complexes with one or more
magnesium ions in an enzyme's active site contributes in a large way to
the reactivity of acyl phosphates.

<img src="media/image186.emf"
style="width:4.75556in;height:1.58889in" />

fig 15

A magnesium ion acts as a Lewis acid, accepting electron density from
the oxygen end of the acyl carbonyl bond, which greatly increases the
degree of partial positive charge - and thus the electrophilicity - of
the carbonyl carbon. The magnesium ion also balances negative charge on
the phosphate, making it a weak base and excellent leaving group.

We have already learned that the carboxylate functional group is the
*least* reactive substrate for an enzyme-catalyzed acyl substitution
reactions. In biology, though, carboxylates are frequently transformed
into thioesters, carboxylic esters, and amides, all of which are higher
in energy, meaning that these transformations are thermodynamically
'uphill'.

<img src="media/image187.emf"
style="width:3.22222in;height:2.66667in" />

fig 16

How are these uphill substitutions accomplished? They are not carried
out directly:

like all thermodynamically unfavorable reactions in biochemistry, they
are linked to an energy-releasing, 'downhill' reaction. In this case,
(and many others), the linked reaction that 'pays for' the uphill
reaction is hydrolysis of ATP.

*In order to undergo an acyl substitution reaction, a carboxylate must
first be activated by phosphorylation.* You are already familiar with
this phosphoryl group transfer process from chapter 9.

In many cases, enzymes activate a carboxylate group by converting it to
an acyl phosphate (the most reactive of the carboxylic acid
derivatives), at the expense of an ATP: the mechanism for this type of
transformation is shown in Section 9.5.

Formation of an acyl phosphate (see section 9.5 for the complete
mechanism):

<img src="media/image188.emf" style="width:4.2in;height:2.38889in" />

fig 18a

As a common alternative, some enzymatic reactions begin with the
conversion of a carboxylate to an acyl-AMP intermediate:

Formation of an acyl -AMP (see section 9.5 for the complete mechanism):

<img src="media/image189.emf"
style="width:3.77778in;height:2.34444in" />

fig 19a

In either case, once the carboxylate group has been activated, the
reactive acyl phosphate/acyl-AMP intermediate can go on to act as the
electrophile in an energetically favorable nucleophilic acyl
substitution reaction.

<img src="media/image190.emf"
style="width:3.97778in;height:2.92222in" />

fig 19b

### 

You have probably heard ATP referred to as the 'energy currency'
molecule. The reactions in this section provide a more concrete
illustration of that concept. A lower-energy group (a carboxylate) is
converted to a higher-energy group (a thioester, for example) by
'spending' a high-energy ATP.

### 

### Section 11.5: Formation of thioesters, carboxylic esters, and amides

<u>11.5A: Thioester formation</u>

Thioesters, which are themselves quite reactive in acyl substitution
reactions (but less so than acyl phosphates), play a crucial role in the
metabolism of fatty acids The ‘acyl X group’ in a thioester is a thiol.

**Coenzyme A** is a thiol-containing coenzyme that plays a key role in
metabolism. Coenzyme A is often abbreviated 'HSCoA' in order to
emphasize the importance of the thiol functionality.

<img src="media/image191.emf"
style="width:5.19444in;height:2.01875in" />

fig 22

Coenzyme A serves as a 'carrier' group in lipid biosynthesis, and is
attached by a thioester linkage to growing fatty acid chains. Palmityl
is shown below as an example of a typical fatty acyl-CoA thioester.

<img src="media/image192.emf" style="width:6in;height:3.98162in" />

fig 23

As we look at reactions involving thioesters in this and future
sections, we will frequently see Coenzyme A playing a key role. We will
also see the formation and breaking of thioester linkages between an
acyl group and other thiol-containing species, such as a cysteine
residue on the enzyme:

<img src="media/image193.emf"
style="width:2.04444in;height:1.32222in" />

fig 24

The term 'thioesterification' refers to the formation of a thioester
functional group. In a typical biochemical thioesterification reaction,
a carboxylate is first converted into an acyl phosphate (in other words,
it is activated), then the acyl phosphate undergoes an acyl substitution
reaction with a thiol nucleophile.

Thioesterification reaction:

<img src="media/image194.emf"
style="width:3.83333in;height:1.16667in" />

Mechanism:

activation phase:

<img src="media/image195.emf" style="width:3in;height:1.16667in" />

acyl substitution phase:

<img src="media/image196.emf"
style="width:5.16667in;height:2.43542in" />

fig 25

Fatty acids such as palmitate , from fats and oils in your food, are
converted to a coenzyme A thioester prior to being broken down by the
fatty acid degradation pathway.

<img src="media/image197.emf"
style="width:3.67778in;height:4.21111in" />

fig 27

A **transthioesterification** reaction is a thioester to thioester
conversion - in other words, an acyl group is transferred from one thiol
to another.

Transthioesterification:

<img src="media/image198.emf"
style="width:4.82431in;height:0.57431in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image199.emf"
style="width:4.94444in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 28

For example, when your body synthesizes fatty acids, the two-carbon
fatty acid 'building block' acetyl CoA is first converted to acetyl
**ACP** (EC 2.3.1.38). ACP is an abbreviation for **'Acyl Carrier
Protein'**, a modified protein with a thiol-containing prosthetic group
attached to one of its serine side chains. Throughout the fatty acid
chain elongation process, the growing hydrocarbon chain remains linked
to ACP.

<img src="media/image200.emf"
style="width:5.31111in;height:2.86667in" />

fig 29

> <u>Exercise 11.5</u>: The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (EC 1.2.4.1)
> catalyzes one of the most central of all central metabolism reactions,
> the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, which links the gycolytic
> pathway to the citric acid (Krebs) cycle. The reaction is quite
> complex, and we are not yet equipped to follow it through from start
> to finish (we will finally be ready to do this in section 17.3). The
> final step, however, we can understand: it is a
> transthioesterification, involving a dithiol coenzyme called
> dihydrolipoamide and coenzyme A. Given the information below, draw out
> a reasonable mechanism for the reaction.
>
> <img src="media/image201.emf"
> style="width:3.51111in;height:0.86667in" />
>
> fig 31
>
> <u>Exercise 11.6:</u> Ubiquitin is a protein which plays a key role in
> many cellular processes by reversibly attaching to other proteins,
> thus altering or regulating their function. Recently, a team of
> researchers uncovered details of the mechanism by which ubiquitin
> (abbreviated Ub) is transferred by the ubiquitin activating enzyme
> (abbreviated E1) to target proteins. In the first part of this
> process, the carboxy terminus of ubiquitin is linked to a cysteine
> side chain on E1, as shown in the incomplete reaction sequence below.
> Complete the figure by drawing the structures of species A and B.
>
> <img src="media/image202.emf" style="width:4.7in;height:1.48889in" />
>
> fig 31b

<u>11.5B: Formation of esters</u>

**Esterification** refers to the formation of a new ester functional
group.

In a typical biochemical esterification, a thioester is subjected to
nucleophilic attack from an alcohol, leading to the formation of an
ester and a thiol.

Esterification reaction (from thioester):

<img src="media/image203.emf"
style="width:4.76667in;height:0.55556in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image204.emf"
style="width:4.87986in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 32

The reaction below is from the synthesis of triacylglycerol, the form in
which fat is stored in our bodies.

Phase 1 (transthioesterification):

<img src="media/image205.emf"
style="width:4.05556in;height:1.33333in" />

Phase 2 (esterification):

<img src="media/image206.emf"
style="width:4.98889in;height:2.03333in" />

fig 33

The reaction, catalyzed by monoacylglycerol acyltransferase (EC
2.3.1.22), begins (phase 1 above) with a preliminary
transthioesterification step in which the fatty acyl group is
transferred from coenzyme A to a cysteine residue in the active site of
the enzyme. Recall that it is a common strategy for enzymes to first
form a covalent link to one substrate before catalyzing the 'main'
chemical reaction.

In phase 2 of the reaction, the fatty acyl group is now ready to be
transferred to glycerol, trading its thioester linkage to the cysteine
for a new ester linkage to one of the alcohol groups on glycerol.

An esterification reaction has tremendous importance in the history of
drug development, a story that we heard in the introduction to this
chapter. The discovery of **penicillin** was arguably one of the most
important events in the history of modern medicine. The key functional
group in penicillin is the four-membered lactam (recall that a lactam is
a cyclic amide).

<img src="media/image207.emf"
style="width:1.84444in;height:1.58889in" />

fig 42

Penicillin, and later generations of antibiotic drugs, have saved
countless lives from once-deadly bacterial infections. The elucidation
of the chemical mechanism of penicillin action was also a milestone in
our developing understanding of how drugs function on a molecular level.
We now know that penicillin, and closely related drugs such as
ampicillin and amoxycillin, work by inhibiting an enzyme that is
involved in the construction of the peptide component bacterial cell
walls. The details of the wall-building reaction itself are outside the
scope of this discussion, but it is enough to know that the process
involves the participation of a nucleophilic serine residue in the
active site of the enzyme. The penicillin molecule is able to enter the
active site, and once inside, the lactam group serves as an
electrophilic 'bait' for the nucleophilic serine:

<img src="media/image208.emf" style="width:5.25in;height:4.12986in" />

fig 43

Although you might expect that an amide-to-ester conversion such as what
is shown above would be energetically unfavorable based on the
reactivity trends we have learned, this lactam is in fact much more
reactive than an ordinary amide group due to the effect of ring strain:
recall from section 3.2 that four-membered rings are highly strained,
and considerable energy is released when they are opened.

Ring strain also accounts for why penicillin has a tendency to degrade:
when in contact with water, the lactam will spontaneously hydrolyze over
time, which opens the ring and forms a carboxylate group.

Unfortunately, many strains of bacteria have acquired an enzyme called
**β-lactamase** (EC 3.5.2.6), that catalyzes rapid hydrolysis of the
lactam ring in penicillin-based drugs, rendering them inactive. These
bacteria are consequently resistant to penicillin and related
antibiotics. As you are probably aware, the evolution of drug resistance
in bacteria is a major, world-wide health problem, and scientists are
engaged in a constant battle to develop new antibiotics as the older
ones become less and less effective.

In a **transesterification** reaction, one ester is converted into
another by an acyl substitution reaction.

Mechanism for a transesterification reaction:

<img src="media/image209.emf"
style="width:4.87986in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 34

If studying organic chemistry sometimes gives you a headache, you might
want to turn to a transesterification reaction for help. Prostaglandins
are a family of molecules that promote a wide range of biological
processes, including inflammation. Acetylsalicylic acid, commonly known
as aspirin, acts by transferring - through a transesterification
reaction - an acetyl group to a serine residue on the enzyme responsible
for the biosynthesis of prostaglandin H<sub>2</sub> (one member of the
prostaglandin family).

<img src="media/image210.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.41856in" />

fig 35

Acetylation of this serine blocks a channel leading to the active site,
effectively shutting down the enzyme, impeding prostaglandin production,
and inhibiting the inflammation process that causes headaches.

In section 11.8, we will see two laboratory acyl substitution reactions
that lead to the formation of aspirin and ibuprofen.

<u>Exercise 11.7</u>: Discuss the key structural feature of aspirin that
makes it so effective at transferring its acetyl group - in other words,
why is the ester group in aspirin more reactive than a typical ester?

<u>  
</u>

> <u>11.5C: Amide formation</u>

An activated carboxylate group (in other words, acyl phosphate or
acyl-AMP) can be converted to an amide through nucleophilic attack by an
amine.

Mechanism for amide formation:

<img src="media/image211.emf"
style="width:5.62986in;height:3.19444in" />

fig 18

The amino acid biosynthesis pathways provide examples of amide formation
in biology. The amino acid glutamine is synthesized in most species by
converting the carboxylate side chain of glutamate (another amino acid)
to an amide, after first activating the carboxylate by
monophosphorylation: (EC 6.3.1.2)

<img src="media/image212.emf" style="width:4.4in;height:2.83333in" />

fig 20

A similar process takes place in the synthesis of asparagine from
aspartate, except that the activated carboxylate in this case is an
acyl-AMP:

<img src="media/image213.emf" style="width:4.73333in;height:2.7in" />

fig 21

*\*In the asparagine synthesis reaction, the ammonia nucleophile
actually comes from hydrolysis of a glutamine molecule.*

<u>Exercise 11.8</u>: A enzyme in bacteria is thought to be responsible
for resistance to a class of antibiotics that includes apramycin,
ribostamycin and paromomycin. The enzyme catalyzes acetylation of the
antibiotic compound with acetyl-CoA as an additional substrate. The
structure of acetylated apramycin is shown below.

<img src="media/image214.emf"
style="width:3.77778in;height:1.81111in" />

fig 21a

> a\) Identify the acetyl group that has been transferred to apramycin,
> (and thus inactivating it).
>
> b\) What functional group acts as an acetyl group *donor*? What
> functional group acts as an acetyl group?
>
> c\) What is the coproduct of the reaction?
>
> **Section 11.6: Hydrolysis of thioesters, esters, and amides**

So far we have been looking at the *formation* of thioesters, carboxylic
esters, and amides, starting from carboxylates. In hydrolytic acyl
substitution reactions, nucleophilic water is the incoming nucleophile
and a carboxylate group is the final product. Because carboxylates are
the least reactive among the carboxylic acid derivatives, these
hydrolysis reactions are thermodynamically favorable, with thioester
hydrolysis the most favorable of the three.

Thioester, carboxylic ester, and amide hydrolysis:

<img src="media/image215.emf"
style="width:2.83333in;height:2.32222in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image216.emf"
style="width:5.08333in;height:2.47222in" />

fig 37

In the citric acid (Krebs) cycle, (*S*)-citryl CoA is hydrolyzed to
citrate (EC 2.3.3.8):

<img src="media/image217.emf"
style="width:4.53333in;height:0.92222in" />

fig 38

**Acetylcholinesterase** (EC 3.1.1.7), an enzyme present in the synapse,
catalyzes hydrolysis of the ester group in acetylcholine, a
neurotransmitter that triggers muscle contraction.

<img src="media/image218.emf"
style="width:5.15556in;height:1.15556in" />

(fig 39)

Like many other hydrolytic enzymes, the acetylcholinesterase reaction
proceeds in two phases: first, a covalent enzyme-substrate intermediate
is formed when the acyl group of acetylcholine is transferred to an
active-site serine on the enzyme (a transesterification reaction). A
water nucleophile then attacks this ester, driving off acetate and
completing the hydrolysis.

<u>Exercise 11.9</u>: Based on the above description, draw the structure
of the covalent enzyme-substrate intermediate in the
acetylcholinesterase reaction.

If the action of acetylcholinesterase is inhibited, acetylcholine in the
synapse does not get hydrolyzed and thus accumulates, resulting in
paralysis and death in severe cases. **Sarin** nerve gas is a potent
inhibitor of acetylcholinasterase action. Some victims of the Tokyo
subway sarin attack in 1995 who were exposed to low levels of the gas
reported that they initially realized that something was wrong when they
noticed how dark everything seemed around them. This was due to
uncontrolled contraction of their pupils. You will be invited to
consider the mechanism of inhibition by sarin in problem 11.12.

Peptide (amide) bonds in proteins and polypeptides are subject to
spontaneous (nonenzymatic) hydrolysis in water.

<img src="media/image219.emf"
style="width:5.84444in;height:1.62222in" />

fig 40

Although this amide to carboxylate conversion is *thermodynamically* a
downhill reaction, peptide bonds are *kinetically* very stable (they
react slowly) at neutral pH. In fact, the half-life for uncatalyzed
hydrolysis of a peptide bond in pH 7 water is by some estimates as high
as 1000 years. (*Ann. Rev. Biochem*. **2011**, *80*, 645.)

The stability of peptides bonds makes good physiological sense: we would
all be in trouble if our enzymes, receptors, and structural proteins
were hydrolyzing away while we slept! That being said, it is also true
that *controlled, specific* hydrolysis of peptide bonds, catalyzed by a
large, diverse class of enzymes called **proteases**, is a critical
biochemical reaction type that can occur very rapidly, in many different
biological contexts. For example, many proteins only become active after
they have been ‘processed' - in other words, hydrolyzed at a specific
amino acid location by a specific protease.

Although all proteases catalyze essentially the same reaction – amide
hydrolysis - different protease subfamilies have evolved different
catalytic strategies to accomplish the same result. **HIV protease** is
the target of some the most recently-developed anti-HIV drugs. It plays
a critical role in the life cycle if the HIV virus, hydrolyzing specific
peptide bonds of essential viral proteins in order to convert them to
their active forms. HIV protease is a member of the **aspartyl
protease** subfamily, so-named because of the two aspartate residues
located in the active sites of these enzymes. HIV protease is also, as
you are probably aware, the target of **HIV protease inhibitor** drugs,
which are a component of the most effective treatment currently
available for HIV infection.

In HIV protease and other aspartyl proteases, the two enzymatic
aspartates residues (shaded grey and abbreviated 'Asp<sub>1</sub>' and
'Asp<sub>2</sub> 'in the figure below) work in concert to activate the
electrophile, nucleophile, and leaving group in the reaction.

<img src="media/image220.emf"
style="width:5.51875in;height:4.93542in" />

## fig 41

Exactly how this works is a subject of some debate and the details may
well vary according to the enzyme in question, but one likely mechanism
is illustrated in the figure above, where Asp<sub>1</sub>, which is
initially in its protonated form, contributes a hydrogen bond to draw
electron density away from the carbonyl carbon, making it more
electrophilic. At the same time, Asp<sub>2</sub>, which begins the
reaction cycle in its anionic form, deprotonates the water molecule to
make it more nucelophilic. In step 2, Asp<sub>2</sub> donates a proton
back to the nitrogen, making it a better leaving group.

HIV protease inhibitors shut down this reaction, which prevents the
virus from processing the proteins that it uses to bond to host cells.

[Animation of HIV protease and
inhibitors](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dDo_s6a3wcM&list=UUBkuiMC1rIybuTcyMK-jWKw&index=7)

<u>Exercise 11.10</u>**:** Lactonase (EC 3.1.1.17), the second enzyme in
the oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway, catalyzes
hydrolysis of the lactone (cyclic ester) group in
6-phosphogluconolactone. Draw the structure of 6-phosphogluconate, the
product of this reaction.

<img src="media/image221.emf" style="width:3.5in;height:1.32222in" />

fig 41a

<u>Exercise 11.11</u>: Draw the product of the β-lactamase-catalyzed
hydrolysis of penicillin as described in section 11.6.

<u>Exercise 11.12</u>: What is the missing product (designated below by
question marks) in the reaction below, which is part of degradation
pathway for the amino acid tryptophan? How could you describe this
reaction in organic chemistry terminology?

<img src="media/image222.emf"
style="width:4.47778in;height:1.33333in" />

fig 41b

**Section 11.7: Protein synthesis on the ribosome**

Recall from section 1.3D that the 'peptide bonds' which link amino acids
to form polypeptides and proteins are in fact amide functional groups.
The figure below shows the first four amino acid residues in a protein,
starting at the amino terminus.

<img src="media/image223.emf"
style="width:4.16667in;height:1.67778in" />

fig 56

Let’s take a look at the chemistry behind the formation of a new peptide
bond between the first two amino acids - which we will call aa-1 and
aa-2 - in a growing protein molecule. This process takes place on the
ribosome, which is essentially a large biochemical 'factory' in the
cell, composed up of many enzymes and RNA molecules, and dedicated to
the assembly of proteins. You will learn more in a biochemistry or cell
biology course about the complex but fascinating process of ribosomal
protein synthesis. For now, we will concentrate on the enzyme-catalyzed
organic transformation that is taking place: the formation of an amide
from a carboxylate and an amine.

We have seen amide-forming reactions before – think back to the
glutamine and asparagine synthetase reactions (section 11.5C). The same
ideas that we learned for those reactions hold true for peptide bond
formation: the carboxylate group on a substrate amino acid must first be
activated, and the energy for this activation comes from ATP.

The carboxylate group of aa-1 is first transformed to an acyl-AMP
intermediate through a nucleophilic substitution reaction at the
α-phosphate of ATP.

<img src="media/image224.emf"
style="width:3.97778in;height:1.23333in" />

fig 57

In the next step, the amino acid is transferred to a special kind of RNA
polymer called transfer RNA, or tRNA for short. We need not concern
ourselves here with the structure of tRNA molecules- all we need to know
for now is that the nucleophile in this reaction is a hydroxyl group on
the terminal adenosine of a tRNA molecule. Because this tRNA molecule is
specific to aa-1, we will call it tRNA-1

<img src="media/image225.emf"
style="width:3.94444in;height:1.73333in" />

fig 58

The incoming nucleophile is an alcohol, thus what we are seeing is an
esterification: an acyl substitution reaction between the activated
carboxylate of aa-1 and an alcohol on tRNA-1 to form an ester.

<img src="media/image226.emf"
style="width:4.87778in;height:1.93333in" />

fig 59

This reaction, starting with activation of the amino acid, is catalyzed
by a class of enzymes called **aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases** (there are
many such enzymes in the cell, each one recognizing its own amino acid -
tRNA pair).

The first amino acid is now linked via an ester group to tRNA-1. The
actual peptide bond-forming reaction occurs when a second amino acid
(aa-2) also linked to its own tRNA-2 molecule, is positioned next to the
first amino acid on the ribosome. In another acyl substitution reaction,
catalyzed by an enzymatic component of the ribosome called **peptidyl
transferase** (EC 2.3.2.12), the amino group on aa-2 displaces tRNA1:
thus, an ester has been converted to an amide (thermodynamically
downhill, so ATP is not required).

<img src="media/image227.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.5508in" />

fig 60

This process continues on the ribosome, as one amino acid after another
is added to the growing protein chain:

<img src="media/image228.emf"
style="width:3.42222in;height:3.48889in" />

fig 61

When a genetically-coded signal indicates that the chain is complete, an
*ester hydrolysis* reaction – as opposed to another amide formation -
occurs on the last amino acid, which we will call aa-*n*. This reaction
is catalyzed by proteins called **release factors** (RFs).

<img src="media/image229.emf"
style="width:4.92222in;height:2.03333in" />

fig 62

This hydrolysis event frees the mature protein from the ribosome, and
results in the formation of a free carboxylate group at the end of the
protein (this is called the carboxy-terminus, or *C*-terminus of the
protein, while the other end – the ‘starting’ end – is called the
*N*-terminus).

### Section 11.8: Nucleophilic substitution at activated amides and carbamides

In discussing the nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions of acyl
phosphates, thioesters, esters, and amides, we have seen many slight
variations on one overarching mechanistic theme. Let’s now look at a
reaction that can be thought of as a ‘cousin’ of the nucleophilic acyl
substitution, one that follows the same general pattern but differs in
several details. Below is a generic illustration of this reaction type:

<img src="media/image230.emf"
style="width:5.47222in;height:1.07431in" />

fig 62a

Looking at this reaction, you can see that substitution is occurring at
an amide group, but the atom that gets expelled is the amide *oxygen*
rather than the amide nitrogen. Also, we see that the substituting
nucleophile is an amine, and the product is a functional group referred
to as an **amidinium** ion (the uncharged conjugate base is called an
**amidine**, and the pKa of the group is close enough to 7 that it can
be shown in either protonated or deprotonated form in a biological
context). As we learned previously in this chapter, amides are
comparatively stable to nucleophilic substitution, and thus it stands to
reason that the starting amide must be *activated* before the reaction
can take place. This occurs, as you might predict, through the formation
of an acyl phosphate intermediate at the expense of one ATP molecule.
The amide *oxygen* acts as a nucleophile, attacking the α-phosphate of
ATP to form the activated acyl-AMP intermediate:

Substitution at an activated amide, phase 1 (activation):

<img src="media/image231.emf"
style="width:3.74097in;height:3.21319in" />

fig 62b

Next, a kind of acyl substitution occurs that we have not yet seen: an
amine nitrogen attacks the electrophilic carbon of a carbon-*nitrogen*
double bond, and the reaction proceeds through a tetrahedral
intermediate before the AMP group is expelled, taking with it what was
originally the carbonyl oxygen of the starting amide.

Substitution at an activated amide, phase 2:

<img src="media/image232.emf" style="width:6in;height:3.9788in" />

fig 62c

**Carbamides**, a kind of 'double amide' functional group in which a
carbonyl oxygen is bonded to *two* nitrogens, also undergo this type of
reaction, leading to the formation of a **guanidinium/gaunidine**
functional group (look again at the structure of the amino acid
[arginine](http://www.sigmaaldrich.com/content/dam/sigma-aldrich/structure4/054/mfcd00002635.eps/_jcr_content/renditions/mfcd00002635-medium.png)
and you will see that it contains a guanidinium group on the side
chain).

<img src="media/image233.emf"
style="width:5.63889in;height:2.97222in" />

The reaction catalyzed by argininosuccinate synthetase (EC 6.3.4.5) is
the second step in the urea cycle, a four-step series of reactions in
which ammonia is converted into urea for elimination in urine. Note that
the substitution takes place at the carbamide group of citrulline, the
nucleophilic amine is on aspartate, and the product has a guanidinium
functional group.

<img src="media/image234.emf"
style="width:5.65764in;height:2.11111in" />

<u>Exercise 11.13</u>

a\) Draw the structure of the 'activated carbamide' intermediate in the
reaction above.

b\) Draw the structure of the cyclic product of a *hypothetical*
intramolecular substitution reaction of citrulline (ie. aspartate is not
involved).

**Section 11.9: Nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions in the lab**

All of the biological nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions we have
seen so far have counterparts in laboratory organic synthesis.
Mechanistically, one of the biggest differences between the biological
and the lab versions is that the lab reactions usually are run with a
strong acid or base as a catalyst, whereas biological reactions are of
course taking place at physiological pH. When proposing mechanisms,
then, care must be taken to draw intermediates in their reasonable
protonation states: for example, a hydronium ion
(H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+)</sup> intermediate is reasonable to propose in an
acidic reaction, but a hydroxide (OH<sup>-</sup>) intermediate is not.

<u>  
</u>

<u>11.9A: Ester reactions - bananas, soap and biodiesel</u>

Acid-catalyzed synthesis of flavor compounds such as isopentyl acetate
(an ester with the flavor of banana) is simple to carry out in the lab.
In this esterification reaction, acetic acid is combined with isopentyl
alcohol along with a catalytic amount of sulfuric acid.

Acid-catalyzed esterification (laboratory reaction):

<img src="media/image235.emf"
style="width:5.16667in;height:0.92222in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image236.emf"
style="width:5.32431in;height:5.72222in" />

fig 46

The carbonyl oxygen of acetic acid is first protonated (step 1), which
draws electron density away from the carbon and increases its
electrophilicity. In step 2, the alcohol nucleophile attacks: notice
that under acidic conditions, the nucleophile is not deprotonated
simultaneously as it attacks (as we would show in a biochemical
mechanism), and the tetrahedral intermediate is a cation rather than an
anion. In step 3, a proton is transferred from one oxygen atom to
another, creating a good leaving group (water) which is expelled in step
4. Finally (step 5), the carbonyl oxygen on the ester is deprotonated,
regenerating the catalytic acid.

This reaction is highly reversible, because carboxylic acids are
approximately as reactive as esters. In order to obtain good yields of
the ester, an excess of acetic acid can be used, which by Le Chatelier's
principle (see your General Chemistry textbook for a review) shifts the
equilibrium toward the ester product.

**Saponification** is a common term for base-induced hydrolysis of an
ester. For example, methyl benzoate will hydrolize to benzoate and
methanol when added to water with a catalytic amount of sodium
hydroxide.

Mechanism of base-catalyzed ester hydrolysis (saponification):

<img src="media/image237.emf"
style="width:5.76875in;height:2.61111in" />

fig 47

Addition of the base provides hydroxide ion to act as a nucleophile
(hydroxide is of course a better nucleophile than water) in step 1. The
tetrahedral intermediate (anionic in this case, because the reaction
conditions are basic) then collapses in step 2, and the alkoxide
(CH<sub>3</sub>O<sup>-</sup>) leaves. We are not used to seeing
alkoxides or hydroxides as leaving groups in biochemical reactions,
because they are strong bases - but in a basic solution, this is a
reasonable chemical step. Step 3 is simply an acid-base reaction between
the carboxylic acid and the alkoxide. Note that this is referred to as
base-*induced* rather than base-catalyzed because hydroxide is not
regenerated, and thus a full molar equivalent of base must be used.

The saponification process derives its name from the ancient craft of
soap-making, in which the ester groups of triacylglycerols in animal
fats are hydrolized under basic conditions to glycerol and fatty acyl
anions (see section 2.5A for a reminder of how fatty acyl anions work as
soap).

<img src="media/image238.emf" style="width:5.1in;height:1.88889in" />

fig 48

We learned earlier about transesterification reactions in the context of
the chemical mechanism of aspirin. Transesterification also plays a key
role in a technology that is already an important component in the
overall effort to develop environmentally friendly, renewable energy
sources: biodeisel. You may have heard stories about people running
their cars on biodeisel from used french fry oil. To make biodeisel,
triacylglycerols in fats and oils can be transesterified with methanol
or ethanol under basic conditions. The fatty acyl methyl and ethyl ester
products are viable motor fuels.

<img src="media/image239.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.83333in" />

> fig 36

<u>Exercise 11.14</u>: Draw structures of the carboxylic acid and
alcohol starting materials that could be used to synthesize the fragrant
fruit esters shown in section 11.1.

<u>Exercise 11.15</u>: What would happen if you tried to synthesize
isopentyl acetate (banana oil) with basic rather than acidic conditions?
Would this work?

<u>Exercise 11.16</u>: Consider the reverse direction of the
acid-catalyzed esterification reaction. What would you call this
reaction in organic chemistry terms?

<u>Exercise 11.17</u>: An alternative way to synthesize esters is to
start with a carboxylate and an alkyl halide. Draw a mechanism for such
a synthesis of methyl benzoate - what type of reaction mechanism is
this?

<u>11.9B: Acid chlorides and acid anhydrides</u>

In the cell, acyl phosphates and thioesters are the most reactive of the
carboxylic acid derivatives. In the organic synthesis lab, their
counterparts are acid chlorides and acid anhydrides, respectively. Of
the two, acid chlorides are the more reactive, because the chloride ion
is a weaker base and better leaving group than the carboxylate ion (the
pKa of HCl is -7, while that of carboxylic acids is about 4.5: remember,
a stronger conjugate acid means a weaker conjugate base).

Acid chlorides can be prepared from carboxylic acids using
SOCl<sub>2</sub>:

<img src="media/image240.emf"
style="width:3.31111in;height:1.04444in" />

fig 49

Acid anhydrides can be prepared from carboxylic acids and an acid
chloride under basic conditions:

<img src="media/image241.emf"
style="width:4.64444in;height:0.87778in" />

fig 50

Acetic anhydride is often used to prepare acetate esters and amides from
alcohols and amines, respectively. The synthesis of aspirin and
acetaminophen are examples:

<img src="media/image242.emf"
style="width:5.55556in;height:3.47778in" />

fig 51

A carboxylic acid cannot be *directly* converted into an amide because
the amine nucleophile would simply act as a base and deprotonate the
carboxylic acid:

<img src="media/image243.emf"
style="width:4.23333in;height:0.62222in" />

fig 52

Instead, the carboxylic acid is first converted to an acid chloride (in
other words, the carboxylic acid is *activated*), then the acid chloride
is combined with an amine to make the amide.

<img src="media/image244.emf"
style="width:4.17778in;height:2.82222in" />

fig 53

This sequence of reactions is a direct parallel to the biochemical
glutamine and asparagine synthase reactions we saw earlier in the
chapter (section 11.5A), except that the activated form of carboxylic
acid is an acid chloride instead of an acyl phosphate or acyl-AMP.

<u>Exercise 11.18</u>: For the preparation of the amide below, show a
starting carboxylate and amine and the intermediate acid chloride
species.

<img src="media/image245.emf"
style="width:1.08333in;height:0.82431in" />

<u>11.9C: Polyesters and polyamides</u>

If you have ever had the misfortune of undergoing surgery or having to
be stitched up after a bad cut, it is likely that you benefited from our
increasing understanding of polymers and carboxylic ester chemistry.
Polyglycolic acid is a material commonly used to make dissolving
sutures. It is a **polyester** - a polymer linked together by ester
groups - and is formed from successive acyl substitution reactions
between the alcohol group on one end of a glycolic acid monomer and the
carboxylic acid group on a second:

<img src="media/image246.emf"
style="width:5.66667in;height:3.75556in" />

fig 44

The resulting polymer - in which each strand is generally several
hundred to a few thousand monomers long - is strong, flexible, and not
irritating to body tissues. It is not, however, permanent: the ester
groups are reactive to gradual, spontaneous hydrolysis at physiological
pH, which means that the threads will dissolve naturally over several
weeks, eliminating the need for them to be cut out by a doctor.

<u>Exercise 11.19</u>: Dacron, a polyester used in clothing fiber, is
made of *alternating* dimethyl terephthalate and ethylene glycol
monomers.

<img src="media/image247.emf"
style="width:3.71111in;height:0.95556in" />

fig 54

a\) Draw the structure of a Dacron tetramer (in other words, four
monomers linked together).

b\) Water is a side product of glycolic acid polymerization. What is the
equivalent side product in Dacron production?

<u>Exercise 11.20</u>: Nylon 6,6 is a widely used poly***amide***
composed of alternating monomers. Nylon 6,6 has the structure shown
below -the region within the parentheses is the repeating unit, with
'*n'* indicating a large number of repeats. Identify the two monomeric
compounds used to make the polymer.

<img src="media/image248.emf"
style="width:3.44444in;height:1.28889in" />

fig 55

<u>11.9D: The Gabriel synthesis of primary amines</u>

The Gabriel synthesis, named after the 19th-century German chemist
Siegmund Gabriel, is a useful way to convert alkyl halides to amines and
another example of S<sub>N</sub>2 and acyl substitution steps in the
laboratory. The nitrogen in the newly introduced amine group comes from
phthalimide. In the first step of the reaction, phthalimide is
deprotonated by hydroxide, then in step 2 it acts as a nucleophile to
displace a halide in an S<sub>N</sub>2 reaction (phthalimide is not a
very powerful nucleophile, so this reaction works only with unhindered
primary or methyl halides).

<img src="media/image249.emf"
style="width:5.86667in;height:3.25556in" />

fig 55a

Step 3 is simply a pair of hydrolytic acyl substitution steps to release
the primary amine, with an aromatic dicarboxylate by-product.

<u>Exercise 11.21</u>: Phthalimide contains an 'imide' functional group,
and has a pKa of approximately 10. What makes the imide group so much
more acidic than an amide, which has a pKa of approximately 17?

As an alternative procedure, release of the amine in step 3 can be
carried out with hydrazine (H<sub>2</sub>NNH<sub>2</sub>) instead of
hydroxide. Again, this occurs through two nucleophilic acyl substitution
reactions.

<img src="media/image250.emf"
style="width:4.86667in;height:1.15556in" />

fig 55b

In 2000, chemists at MIT synthesizing a porphyrin-containing molecule
introduced two amine groups using the Gabriel synthesis with hydrazine.
Porphyrins, which include the 'heme' in our red blood cells, are an
important family of biomolecules with a variety of biochemical function
(*J. Org. Chem*. **2000**, *65*, 5298).

<img src="media/image251.emf"
style="width:5.93333in;height:4.05556in" />

fig 55c

**Section 11.10: A look ahead - acyl substitution reactions with a
carbon or hydride nucleophile**

Although we have seen many different types of nucleophilic acyl
substitutions in this chapter, we have not yet encountered a reaction in
which the incoming nucleophile is a carbanion or a hydride. Recall that
in the previous chapter on aldehydes and ketones, we also postponed
discussion of nucleophilic carbonyl addition reactions in which a
carbanion or a hydride is the nucleophile. The reason for putting off
these discussions is that these topics are both important and diverse
enough to warrant their own dedicated chapters.

In the next chapter, we will see many carbonyl addition and acyl
substitution reactions where the nucleophilic species is a
resonance-stabilized *carbanion* such as an enolate (section 7.6B). Then
in chapter 14, we will encounter nucleophilic addition and acyl
substitution reactions in which a *hydride ion* (H<sup>-</sup>)
essentially plays the part of a nucleophile. In these chapters we will
see how nucleophilic carbanion and hydride species are generated in a
biochemical context. For now, see if you can predict the result of the
following biochemical reactions.

<u>Exercise 11.22</u>: Predict the products of the following
nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions, both of which are part of the
biosynthesis of isoprenoid compounds such as cholesterol and lycopene:

a\) acetoacetyl CoA acetyltransferase reaction (enolate nucleophile)

<img src="media/image252.emf" style="width:6in;height:0.59016in" />

(Fig 24)

b\) HMG-CoA reductase reaction (to repeat, the nucleophile here is not
*literally* an isolated hydride ion, which would be a very unlikely
species in a physiological environment. We will learn in chapter 16 what
is actually going on, but for the time being, just predict the result of
an acyl substitution reaction with a "hydride ion" nucleophile.)

<img src="media/image253.emf"
style="width:5.25556in;height:0.92222in" />

fig 45

**Key learning objectives for this chapter**

Be able to recognize and draw examples of carboxylic acid derivative
functional groups:

carboxylic acids/carboxylates

acyl phosphates (both acyl monophosphate and acyl-AMP)

thioesters

esters

amides

acid chlorides

carboxylic acid anhydrides

Know the meaning of the terms 'acyl', 'acetyl', 'formyl', 'lactone', and
'lactam'.

You need not memorize the structure of coenzyme A, but you should
recognize that it contains a key thiol group and often forms thioester
linkages, particularly in fatty acid metabolism.

Understand what happens in a nucleophilic acyl substitution (also called
acyl transfer reaction), and be able to draw mechanistic arrows for a
generalized example.

Know the trends in relative reactivity for the carboxylic acid
derivatives:

> in a biological context (acyl phosphates and thioesters as activated
> acyl groups)
>
> in a laboratory context (acid chlorides and carboxylic acid anhydrides
> as activated acyl groups)

Recognize and understand the most important types of nucleophilic acyl
substitution reactions in biology:

> How a carboxylate group, which is unreactive to nucleophilic acyl
> substitution reactions, is activated in the cell by ATP-dependent
> phosphorylation to either acyl monophosphate or acyl-AMP.
>
> Conversion of an acyl phosphate to a thioester, a (carboxylic) ester,
> or an amide.
>
> Transthioesterification, esterification, and transesterification
> reactions.
>
> Conversion of a thioester or ester to an amide
>
> Hydrolysis of a thioester, a (carboxylic) ester, or an amide to a
> carboxylate.

Understand the energetics of the above reactions:

> Carboxylate to acyl phosphate is 'uphill' energetically, paid for by
> coupling to hydrolysis of one ATP
>
> Other conversions above are 'downhill': it is unlikely, for example,
> to see a direct conversion of an amide to an ester.
>
> (Notable exception: the lactam (cyclic amide) group in penicillin is
> very reactive due to ring strain, and forms an ester with an active
> site serine residue in the target protein)

You need not memorize all of the details of peptide bond formation on
the ribosome, but you should be able to follow the description in
section 7 and recognize the nucleophilic acyl substitution reactions
that are occuring.

Be able to draw complete mechanisms for the following lab reactions:

acid-catalyzed esterification of a carboxylic acid

> saponification (base-catalyzed hydrolysis of an ester), application to
> soap-making

base-catalyzed transesterification, application to biodiesel production

Understand how acid chlorides and carboxylic acid anhydrides serve as
activated acyl groups in laboratory synthesis. Be able to describe how
an amide to ester conversion could be carried out in the laboratory.

Understand how polyesters and polyamides are formed. Given the structure
of a polymer be able to identify monomer(s), and vice-versa.

Be able to recognize, predict products of, and draw mechanisms for the
Gabriel synthesis of primary amines, using either hydroxide ion or
hydrazine to release the amine product.

**Problems**

**P11.1**: Here is some practice in recognizing carboxylic acid
derivative functional groups in large, complex biological molecules.
There are seven amide and four ester groups in the molecules below - see
if you can find them all.

<img src="media/image254.emf"
style="width:5.87778in;height:4.28889in" />

**P11.2**: (EC 6.3.4.16)

a\) Predict the structures of intermediate compounds A, B, and C in the
reaction below (EC 6.3.4.16). Compound C contains an activated
carboxylate functionality. Use abbreviations as appropriate.

b\) Draw a reasonable mechanism for the A to B step

<img src="media/image255.emf"
style="width:4.47778in;height:0.71111in" />

**P11.3:** Imagine that acetylcholine is combined with
acetylcholinesterase (section 11.6) in a buffer made from
<sup>18</sup>O-labeled water. Where would you expect to find the
<sup>18</sup>O label in the products?

**P11.4**: Predict the products of this hydrolysis reaction (EC
3.5.1.18):

<img src="media/image256.emf" style="width:2.9in;height:1.04444in" />

**P11.5:** The breakdown of fat in our bodies begins with the action of
lipase enzymes, which catalyze the cleavage of fatty acids from the
glycerol backbone of triacylglycerol (see section 1.3A for a reminder of
the structure of triacylglycerol). A serine residue in the lipase active
site plays a key nucleophilic role in the reaction. Draw the *single
mechanistic step* in which the covalent link between a fatty acid and
the glyceryl backbone is broken, using curved arrow notation and
appropriate abbreviation.

**P11.6**: Before long-chain fatty acids are transported across the
inner mitochondrial membrane, they are temporarily transferred from
Coenzyme A to a transport molecule called carnitine, to which they are
linked by an ester group (EC 2.3.1.21).

> <img src="media/image257.emf"
> style="width:1.65556in;height:0.81111in" />

Draw the structure of fatty acyl carnitine (use R to denote the
hydrocarbon chain of the fatty acid)

**P11.7:** Below is a reaction from carbohydrate metabolism (EC
2.3.1.157). Identify the compound designated with a question mark.

<img src="media/image258.emf"
style="width:4.45556in;height:1.26667in" />

**P11.8**: Propose the most likely enzymatic hydrolysis product of the
substrate below (hint - think about electrophilicity when considering
regiochemical outcomes!) (EC 3.5.2.2) J. Biol. Chem. 2006, 281, 13762
scheme 2)

<img src="media/image259.emf"
style="width:1.58889in;height:1.14444in" />

**P11.9:** The coenzyme tetrahydrofolate (THF) participates in
single-carbon transfer reactions. One derivative of THF, called
10-formyl-THF (abbreviated structure shown below), transfers a formyl
group early in purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis to glycinamide
ribonucleotide.

<img src="media/image260.emf"
style="width:3.12222in;height:1.26667in" />

<img src="media/image261.emf"
style="width:4.33333in;height:1.75556in" />

Draw a nucleophilic attack step for this reaction (assume that acyl
transfer between the two substrates is direct, without any covalent
enzyme-substrate intermediates being formed).

**P11.10**: One of the key steps in the biosynthesis of purine
nucleotides (guanosine and adenosine) in archaea is shown below.

<img src="media/image262.emf" style="width:4.2in;height:1.58889in" />

Identify the missing compounds X and Y in the figure above, and draw the
structure of an acyl phosphate intermediate.

**P11.11**: The reactions below are part of nucleotide biosynthesis.
Predict the structures of compounds A and B. Compound A contains a
carboxylate group, and the reaction that forms compound B is of the type
discussed in section 11.8, in which an amine group substitutes at an
activated amide to form an amidine/amidinium group.

<img src="media/image263.emf"
style="width:3.15764in;height:2.47222in" />

**P11.12:** Recall from section 11.6 that acetylcholinesterase catalyzes
the hydrolysis of the ester group in acetylcholine, going through an
intermediate in which the acetyl group on the substrate is transferred
to a serine on the enzyme by a transesterification reaction. The nerve
gas sarin acts by blocking this initial transesterification step: the
drug enters the active site and attaches to the active site serine.
Given the structure of sarin below, propose a mechanism for how this
happens.

<img src="media/image264.emf" style="width:1in;height:1.05556in" />

**P11.13**: Propose a mechanism for the following reaction from
histidine biosynthesis (EC 3.5.4.19).

<img src="media/image265.emf"
style="width:3.21111in;height:1.28889in" />

**P11.14** (Challenging!) In the final step of the urea cycle (a phase
of amino acid degradation pathways), the amino acid arginine is
hydrolyzed to urea and ornithine (EC 3.5.3.1). Propose a reasonable
mechanism.

<img src="media/image266.emf"
style="width:2.83333in;height:1.15556in" />

**P11.15**: In the biosynthetic pathway for the DNA/RNA bases uridine
and cytidine, a reaction occurs in which carbamoyl phosphate condenses
with aspartate, and the resulting intermediate cyclizes to form
dihydroorotate. Propose a mechanism for this transformation. *Hint*: in
a very unusual step, a carboxylate group is at one point in the process
*directly* subjected to an acyl transfer reaction, without prior
activation by phosphorylation. The enzyme accomplishes this with the
help of two bo.und zinc ions, which serve to stabilize the negative
charge on a hydroxide leaving group. (EC 3.5.2.3) *(Biochemistry*
**2001**, *40*, 6989, Scheme 2)

<img src="media/image267.emf"
style="width:3.31111in;height:1.42222in" />

**P11.16**: Propose a reasonable mechanism for the reaction below (from
lysine biosynthesis), and fill in the missing species indicated by
question marks.

<img src="media/image268.emf"
style="width:3.47778in;height:3.34444in" />

**P11.17**: In a step in the citric acid cycle, hydrolysis of
succinyl-CoA is coupled to phosphorylation of GDP. The mechanism
involves the transient phosphorylation of an active site histidine.
Suggest a (multi-step) mechanism for this process (EC 6.2.1.4).

<img src="media/image269.emf"
style="width:4.08333in;height:2.72222in" />

**P11.18**: A <sup>14</sup>C-labeled diazoketone compound (structure
below) was used to irreversibly inactivate an enzyme called glutaminase
A. Inactivation was shown to occur with <sup>14</sup>C labeling of an
active site cysteine.

a\) Propose a mechanism of inactivation and cysteine labeling.

<img src="media/image270.emf"
style="width:1.90764in;height:0.83333in" />

b\) To a lesser extent, inactivation of the enzyme and labeling of the
cysteine was found to occur with release of a radioactive compound from
the active site. Propose a mechanism for the mode of inactivation.

**P11.19**: Dehelogenase enzymes catalyze the cleavage of carbon-halogen
bonds, and are of interest to scientists looking for new ways to
detoxify organohalogen pollutants that make their way into the
environment. One such dehalogenase catalyzes the following reaction:

<img src="media/image271.emf"
style="width:2.25903in;height:0.75903in" />

An active site aspartate is thought to carry out the initial
nucleophilic attack that expels the chloride.

a\) Draw a likely mechanism for the complete reaction shown above. Look
carefully at the stereochemical progress!

b\) When the active site aspartate was mutated to asparagine, the enzyme
still maintained activity. Mass spectrometry analysis indicated that, at
one point in the catalytic cycle of the mutant enzyme, the asparagine
exists as a cyanoalanine. Draw a likely mechanism for the reaction as
catalyzed by the mutant enzyme, including formation of the transient
cyanoalanine residue and subsequent regeneration of the asparagine.

<img src="media/image272.emf" style="width:2.25in;height:0.79653in" />

**Chapter 12**

**Reactions at the α-carbon, part I**

<img src="media/image273.jpg" style="width:5.30494in;height:3.9787in" />

photo credit: Alan Couch (https://www.flickr.com/photos/couchy/)

**Introduction**

There are lots of things that can kill you in northern Australia. On
land, there is the death adder, the tiger snake and the redback spider;
in the water, you'd be well advised to give wide berth to the salt water
crocodile, the stonefish, the great white shark, and of course, the
duck-billed platypus.

The duck-billed platypus?

Consider this: in 1991, a man fishing a river in northern Queensland,
Australia happened across a platypus sitting on a log. Thinking it was
injured, he picked it up. For his trouble, he spent the next six days in
a nearby hospital, suffering from two puncture wounds in his right hand
that resulted in "immediate, sustained, and devastating" pain, against
which the usual analgesic drugs were almost completely useless. His hand
"remained painful, swollen and with little movement for three weeks.
Significant functional impairment . . . persisted for three months".

\*\*\*

Meanwhile, on the other side of the planet, deep in the rain forests
that straddle the border between eastern Peru and Brazil, a young man of
the Matses tribe prepares himself to receive the 'hunting magic'. He
holds the end of a short wooden stick in a fire for a few minutes, then
removes it and presses the red-hot end into the skin of his chest,
holding it there for long enough for the skin to be burned. Then he
scrapes the burned skin away, and rubs into the wound a paste made from
saliva mixed with secretions taken from the skin of a giant leaf frog.

An American journalist named Peter Gorman, who reports having had the
frog-skin paste administered in the same manner during a visit to a
Matses village, describes what happens next:

> Instantly my body began to heat up. In seconds I was burning from the
> inside . . . I began to sweat. My blood began to race. My heart
> pounded. I became acutely aware of every vein and artery in my body
> and could feel them opening to allow for the fantastic pulse of my
> blood. My stomach cramped and I vomited violently. I lost control of
> my bodily functions. . . (and) fell to the ground. Then, unexpectedly,
> I found myself growling and moving about on all fours. I felt as
> though animals were passing through me, trying to express themselves
> through my body.

After the immediate violent effects pass, the Matses hunter is carried
by his friends to a hammock to recover. After sleeping for a day, he
awakens to find himself with what his people call the 'hunting magic': a
state of heightened awareness, possessed of tremendous energy and an
abnormally keen sense of vision, hearing and smell. In the words of Mr.
Gorman, "everything about me felt larger than life, and my body felt
immensely strong... \[I was\] beginning to feel quite godlike".

\*\*\*

There is a connection between the killer platypus in Australia and the
'hunting magic' in the Amazon, and it has to do with the structure and
reactivity of what organic chemists refer to as the **α-carbon**: the
carbon atom positioned adjacent to a carbonyl or imine group in an
organic molecule:

<img src="media/image274.emf" style="width:5.30556in;height:1.25in" />

fig 1a

It is this chemistry that we are going to be studying for the next two
chapters. But first, let's go back to that river in northern Australia
and the fisherman who apparently didn't pay enough attention in his high
school wildlife biology class.

The platypus, along with a few species of shrews and moles, is an
example of a very rare phenomenon in nature: a venomous mammal. The male
platypus possesses a pair of sharp spurs on each of his hind legs near
the ankle. These spurs are hollow, and connected by a duct to a
venom-producing gland in the thigh. The consensus among scientists who
study the platypus is that males use their venomous barbs mainly when
fighting each other over territory during mating season. Because healthy
animals are often found with multiple scars from spur wounds, a platypus
who gets spurred during a fight with a rival will not always die, but
the experience is unpleasant enough that he will start looking for real
estate a healthy distance down the river.

It is not easy to milk the venom from an angry, thrashing platypus, but
there are scientists out there who have done it. It turns out that, like
snake and spider venom, the venom from a platypus spur consists of a
mixture of neuroactive peptides (peptides are very short proteins - less
than 50 amino acids long). Recently, a team of biochemists from the
Universities of Sydney, Queensland, and Adelaide reported that they were
able to isolate from platypus venom two forms of a 39-amino acid
peptide. Further analysis using NMR and mass spectrometry revealed that
the two forms of the peptide differed in structure only at a single
amino acid: the leucine at the \#2 position. In one form, the leucine
had the L configuration (or *S* if using the *R/S* system), just like
the amino acids in virtually all other peptides and proteins found in
nature. In the other form, this leucine had the unusual D, or *R*
configuration.

<img src="media/image275.emf"
style="width:4.93542in;height:1.54653in" />

fig 1a

Peptides or proteins incorporating D-amino acids are not unheard of in
nature, but this was the first time that one had been found in a mammal.
Interestingly, the venom from certain marine cone snails and spiders -
and, yes, the skin of the giant leaf frog in the Amazon rain forest -
also contain neuroactive peptides with D-amino acids.

What is the advantage - to a platypus, cone snail, spider, or frog - of
making a venomous peptide with *D* stereochemistry on one or more of its
amino acids? It all has to do with *generating diversity of shape and
function*. These are neuroactive peptides: each one interacts in a very
specific way with a specific neural protein, thus exerting a specific
neurological effect on the person or animal exposed to the venom. The
different spatial arrangement of atoms about the α-carbon of D- and
L-amino acids will cause a peptide with a D-leucine at position \#2, for
example, to fold into a different shape than its counterpart with an
L-leucine at the same position. Thus, the two peptides may bind
differently to one or more proteins in the nervous system, and
ultimately may exert different neurological effects - such as intense
pain in the case of playpus venom, or the 'hunting magic' effect in the
case of the peptide from frog skin. The ability to incorporate D-amino
acids greatly expands the potential structural and functional diversity
of these short peptides.

The two stereoisomeric platypus venom peptides are encoded by the same
gene. The peptides are initially synthesized using all *L*-amino acids,
and then the leucine at position \#2 undergoes a 'post-translational
modification': in other words, a specific enzyme binds the all-*L*
peptide *after* it has been synthesized on the ribosome and changes the
leucine residue to the *D* configuration.

It is this reaction - a stereoisomerization reaction that takes place at
the α-carbon of an amino acid - that brings us to the central topic of
this chapter and the next: chemistry at the α-carbon. The key concept to
recall from what we have learned about acidity and basicity in organic
chemistry, and to keep in mind throughout this discussion, is that
α-protons (in other words, protons on α-carbons) are weakly acidic. Loss
of an α-proton forms an **enolate** - a species in which a negative
formal charge is delocalized between a carbon and an oxygen. The
'enolate' term will be very important in the next two chapters, because
most of the reactions we see will go through an enolate intermediate.

<img src="media/image276.emf"
style="width:2.77778in;height:1.52778in" />

fig 1d

In this chapter, we will first see several examples of isomerization
reactions, in which an enzyme acts at the α-carbon of a substrate to
catalyze the interconversion of two constitutional isomers or
stereoisomers. Then, we will be introduced to a reaction type known as
the 'aldol addition' and its reverse counterpart, the 'retro-aldol'
cleavage reaction. Up to now, we have seen plenty of reactions where
bonds were formed and broken between carbon and oxygen, nitrogen, or
sulfur. Here, for the first time, we will see how enzymes can catalyze
the formation or cleavage - again, at the α position - of
*carbon-carbon* bonds: in other words, we will learn how an α-carbon can
be either a nucleophile or a leaving group in an enzymatic reaction.
This has clear importance for an understanding of metabolism in living
things: the molecules of life, after all, are built upon a framework of
carbon-carbon bonds, and metabolism is the process by which living cells
build up and break down complex biomolecules.

It all starts with the α-carbon - and as both the Australian fisherman
and the Amazonian hunter could attest, what happens at the α-carbon can
have some rather dramatic consequences.

**Section 12.1: Review of acidity at the α-carbon**

Let's review what we learned in section 7.6A about the acidity of a
proton on an α-carbon and the structure of the relevant conjugate base,
the enolate ion. Remember that this acidity can be explained by the fact
that the negative charge on the enolate conjugate base is delocalized by
resonance to both the α-carbon *and* the carbonyl oxygen.

<img src="media/image277.emf"
style="width:4.61111in;height:1.72222in" />

fig 1b

The α-carbon on the enolate is *sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized with trigonal
planar geometry, as are the carbonyl carbon and oxygen atoms (now would
be a good time to go back to sections 2.1C, 2.2B, and 2.3B to review, if
necessary, the geometry of π-bonding in conjugated systems). The pKa of
a typical α-proton in aqueous solution is approximately 18-20: acidic,
but only weakly so. Recall from section 7.8, however, that the
*effective* pKa of a functional group on an enzyme-bound molecule can be
altered dramatically by the 'microenvironment' of the active site. In
order to lower the pKa of an α−proton, an enzyme catalyzing a reaction
that begins with an α-proton abstraction step must further stabilize the
negative charge that develops on the oxygen atom of the (enolate)
conjugate base. Different enzymes have evolved different strategies for
accomplishing this task: in some cases, a metal cation (often
Zn<sup>+2</sup>) is bound in the active site to provide a stabilizing
ion-ion interaction. In other cases, stabilization is provided by a
proton-donating group positioned near the oxygen. As a third
possibility, the active site architecture sometimes provides one or more
stabilizing hydrogen bond donor groups.

<img src="media/image278.emf"
style="width:5.08333in;height:1.82431in" />

fig 1e

In most of the mechanism illustrations in this chapter where an enolate
intermediate is depicted, stabilizing metal ions or hydrogen bond
interactions will not be explicitly drawn, for the sake of clarity.
However, whenever you see an enolate intermediate in an enzyme-catalyzed
reaction, you should remember that there are stabilizing interactions in
play inside the active site.

**Section 12.2: Isomerization at the α-carbon**

Enolate ions, as well as enols and and enamines (section 7.6) are the
key reactive intermediates in many biochemical isomerization reactions.
Isomerizations can involve either the interconversion of constitutional
isomers, in which bond connectivity is altered, or of stereoisomers,
where the stereochemical configuration is changed. Enzymes that
interconvert constitutional isomers are usually called **isomerases**,
while those that interconvert the configuration of a chiral carbon are
usually referred to as **racemases** or **epimerases**.

<u>12.2A: Carbonyl isomerization</u>

One very important family of isomerase enzymes catalyzes the shifting of
a carbonyl group in sugar molecules, often converting between a ketose
and an aldose (recall that the terms ketose and aldolse refer to sugar
molecules containing ketone and aldehyde groups, respectively).

Carbonyl isomerization:

<img src="media/image279.emf"
style="width:3.13889in;height:1.15764in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image280.emf"
style="width:4.62986in;height:1.35208in" />

fig 8

The ketose species is first converted to its enol tautomer in step 1
(actually, this particular intermediate is known as an
'**ene-*diol****'* rather than an enol, because there are hydroxyl
groups on both sides of the carbon-carbon double bond). Step 2 leads to
the aldose, and is simply another tautomerization step. However, because
there is a hydroxyl group on the adjacent (blue) carbon, a carbonyl can
form there as well as at the red carbon.

An example is the glycolysis pathway reaction catalyzed by the enzyme
triose phosphate isomerase (EC 5.3.1.1). Here, dihydroxyacetone
phosphate (DHAP) is reversibly converted to glyceraldehyde phosphate
(GAP).

<img src="media/image281.emf"
style="width:5.33333in;height:1.61111in" />

fig 9

Notice that DHAP is achiral while GAP is chiral, and that a new chiral
center is introduced at the middle (red) carbon of GAP. As you should
expect, the enzyme is stereoselective: in step 2 a proton is delivered
to the red carbon, from *behind* the plane of the page, to yield the *R*
enantiomer.

Also in the glycolysis pathway, glucose-6-phosphate (an aldose) and
fructose-6-phosphate (a ketose) are interconverted through an ene-diol
intermediate (EC 5.3.1.9) by an enzyme that is closely related to
triose-phosphate isomerase.

<img src="media/image282.emf" style="width:3.25in;height:1.11111in" />

fig 10

> <u>Exercise 12.1:</u> draw the ene-diol intermediate in the
> phosphoglucose isomerase reaction.

<u>12.2B: Stereoisomerization at the α-carbon</u>

Enolates are a common intermediate in reactions where the stereochemical
configuration of a chiral α-carbon is interconverted. These are commonly
referred to as **racemization** or **epimerization** reactions,
depending on whether the interconverted isomers are enantiomers or
epimers (recall that the term 'epimer' refers to a pair of diastereomers
that differ by a single chiral center).

Racemization/epimerization:

<img src="media/image283.emf"
style="width:3.02778in;height:0.77778in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image284.emf"
style="width:5.36111in;height:1.96319in" />

fig 11

These reactions proceed though a deprotonation-reprotonation mechanism,
illustrated above. In step 1, the chiral α-carbon is deprotonated,
leading to a planar, achiral enolate. In step 2, a proton is delivered
back to the α-carbon, *but from the opposite side from which the proton
was taken in step 1*, resulting in the opposite stereochemistry at this
carbon. Two acid-base groups, positioned at opposing sides of the
enzyme's active site, work in tandem to accomplish this feat.

The proteins and peptides in all known living things are constructed
almost exclusively of L-amino acids, but in rare cases scientists have
identified peptides which incorporate D-amino acids, which have the
opposite stereochemistry at the α-carbon. Amino acid racemase enzymes
catalyze the interconversion of L and D amino acids. As you may recall
from the introductory section to this chapter, the venom of the male
platypus contains a neurotoxic peptide in which an L-leucine amino acid
has been converted by a racemase enzyme to D-leucine. In another
example, the cell walls of bacteria are constructed in part of peptides
containing D-glutamate, converted from L-glutamate by the enzyme
glutamate racemase. (EC 5.1.1.3) (*Biochemistry* **2001***,* *40*,
6199).

<img src="media/image285.emf"
style="width:4.54653in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 12

A reaction (EC 5.1.3.1) in sugar metabolism involves the interconversion
of the epimers ribulose-5-phosphate and xylulose-5-phosphate. The enzyme
that catalyzes this reaction is called an 'epimerase'. (*J. Mol. Biol*.
**2003**, *326*, 127).

<img src="media/image286.emf"
style="width:4.37986in;height:1.02778in" />

fig 13

<u>Exercise 12.2</u>: Draw a reasonable mechanism for the
ribulose-5-phosphate epimerization reaction above. Your mechanism should
show an enolate intermediate and specify stereochemistry throughout.

<u>Exercise 12.3</u>: Predict the products of epimerization reactions
starting with each of the substrates shown. Hint - carbons next to imine
groups can also be considered α-carbons!

> <img src="media/image287.emf"
> style="width:3.63889in;height:0.90764in" />

fig 13

Recall from chapter 3 that a major issue with the drug thalidomide is
the fact that the *R* enantiomer, which is an effective sedative,
rapidly isomerizes in the body to the terotogenic (mutation-causing) *S*
enantiomer. Note that the chiral center in thalidomide is an α-carbon!

<img src="media/image288.emf"
style="width:4.72222in;height:3.79653in" />

fig 13a

Recently, chemists reported the synthesis of a thalidomide derivative in
which the carbonyl group is replaced by an 'oxetane' ring, with the aim
of making an isotopically stable form of the drug (because the carbonyl
group has been removed, racemization is no longer possible - there is no
α-carbon!) (*Org. Lett.* **2013**, *15*, 4312.)

<u>12.2C: Alkene regioisomerization</u>

The position of an alkene group can also be changed through a reaction
in which the first step is abstraction of an α-proton and formation of
an enolate intermediate. The degradation pathway for unsaturated fatty
acids (fatty acids whose hydrocarbon chains contain one or more double
bonds) involves the 'shuffling' of the position of a carbon-carbon
double bond, from a *cis* bond between carbon \#3 and carbon \#4 to a
*trans* bond between carbon \#2 and carbon \#3<sub>.</sub> This is
accomplished by the enzyme enoyl CoA isomerase (EC 5.3.3.8). (*J. Biol
Chem* **2001**, *276*, 13622).

Alkene isomerization:

<img src="media/image289.emf"
style="width:3.58333in;height:0.79653in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image290.emf"
style="width:5.60208in;height:2.47222in" />

fig 14

> <u>Exercise 12.4:</u> Consider the structures of the substrate and
> product of the isomerization reaction above. What two factors
> contribute to the thermodynamic 'driving force' for the
> transformation?
>
> <u>Exercise 12.5</u>: The reaction below is part of the biosynthetic
> pathway for menthol. Suggest a mechanism that includes an enolate
> intermediate.

<img src="media/image291.emf"
style="width:2.86111in;height:1.13889in" />

fig 14a

**  
**

**Section 12.3: Aldol addition reactions**

We arrive now at one of the most important mechanisms in metabolism: the
aldol addition.

Along with Claisen condensation reactions, which we will study in the
next chapter, aldol additions are responsible for most of the
carbon-carbon bond forming events that occur in a living cell. Because
biomolecules are built upon a framework of carbon-carbon bonds,

it is difficult to overstate the importance of aldol addition and
Claisen condensation reactions in the chemistry of living things!

<u>12.3A: Overview of the aldol addition reaction</u>

Consider the potential pathways available to a reactive enolate
intermediate once the α-proton has been abstracted. We'll use
acetaldehyde as a simple example. The oxygen, which bears most of the
negative charge, could act as a base, (step 2 below) and the result
would be an enol.

<img src="media/image292.emf"
style="width:4.11111in;height:1.22222in" />

fig 15

Alternatively, the enolate carbon, which bears a degree of negative
charge, could act as a base, which is simply the reverse of the initial
deprotonation step that formed the enolate in the first place. This of
course just takes us right back to the starting aldehyde.

<img src="media/image293.emf"
style="width:4.13889in;height:1.43542in" />

fig 16

In both of these cases, the electron-poor species attacked by the
enolate is an acidic proton. What if the electron-poor species - the
electrophile - is not a proton but a carbonyl carbon? In other words,
what if the enolate acts not as a base but rather as a *nucleophile* in
a carbonyl addition reaction? For example, the enolate of acetaldehyde
could attack the carbonyl group of a second acetaldehyde molecule. The
result is the formation of a new carbon-carbon bond:

<img src="media/image294.emf"
style="width:4.76875in;height:1.82431in" />

fig 16a

This type of reaction is called an **aldol addition**. *It can be very
helpful to think of an aldol addition reaction as simply a nucleophilic
carbonyl addition (Chapter 10) reaction with an enolate α-carbon (rather
than an alcohol oxygen or amine nitrogen) as the nucleophile.*

An aldol addition reaction:

<img src="media/image295.emf"
style="width:3.96319in;height:1.08333in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image296.emf"
style="width:4.90764in;height:2.04653in" />

fig 17

Historically, the first examples of this mechanism type to be studied
involved reactions very similar to what is shown above: an aldehyde
reacting with itself. Because the resulting product contained both an
**ald**ehyde and an alcoh**ol** functional group, the reaction was
referred to as an 'aldol' addition, a terminology that has become
standard for reactions of this type, whether or not an aldehyde is
involved. More generally, an aldol addition is characterized as a
nucleophilic addition to an aldehyde, ketone, or imine electrophile
where the nucleophile is the α-carbon in an aldehyde, ketone, imine,
ester, or thioester. The enzymes that catalyze aldol reactions are
called, not surprisingly, **aldolases**.

Note that the aldol reaction results in a product in which a hydroxide
group is *two* carbons away from the carbonyl, in the **β position**.
You can think of the β-hydroxy group as a kind of 'signature' for an
aldol addition product.

Depending on the starting reactants, *nonenzyatic* aldol reactions can
take more than one route to form different products. For example, a
reaction between acetaldehyde and 2-butanone could potentially result in
in three different aldol addition products, depending on which of the
three α-carbons (carbons 2, 3, and 5 below) becomes the attacking
nucleophile.

<img src="media/image297.emf"
style="width:3.72222in;height:2.36111in" />

fig 18

<u>Exercise 12.6</u>: (*Hint*: for each reaction, first identify the
nucleophilic and electrophilic carbon atoms on the starting compounds!)

a\) Fill in the appropriate carbon numbers for each of the three
possible aldol addition products shown above.

b\) Draw arrows for the carbon-carbon bond forming step that leads to
each of the three products.

<u>12.3B: Biochemical aldol addition reactions</u>

Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (EC 4.1.2.13) is an enzyme that
participates in both the glycolytic (sugar catabolism) and
gluconeogenesis (sugar synthesis) biochemical pathways. The reaction
catalyzed by fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase links two 3-carbon
sugars, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GAP, the electrophile in the
reaction) and dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP, the nucleophile),
forming a 6-carbon product. In the figures below, the nucleophilic and
electrophilic carbons are identified with dots.

The fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase reaction

<img src="media/image298.emf"
style="width:4.19444in;height:1.38889in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image299.emf"
style="width:5.08333in;height:1.71319in" />

fig 19

fig 20

In step 1 of the reaction, an α-carbon on DHAP is deprotonated, leading
to an enolate intermediate. In this and many other aldolase reactions, a
zinc cation (Zn<sup>+2</sup>) is positioned in the enzyme's active site
so as to interact closely with - and stabilize - the negatively charged
oxygen of the enolate intermediate. This is one important way in which
the enzyme lowers the energy barrier to the reaction.

Next, (step 2), the deprotonated α-carbon attacks the carbonyl carbon of
GAP in a nucleophilic addition reaction, leading to the fructose
1,6-bisphosphate product.

Notice that two new chiral centers are created in this reaction. This
reaction, being enzyme-catalyzed, is highly stereoselective due to the
precise position of the two substrates in the active site: only one of
the four possible stereoisomeric products is observed. The enzyme also
exhibits tight control of regiochemistry: GAP and DHAP could potentially
form two other aldol products which are constitutional isomers of
fructose 1,6-bisposphate.

<u>Exercise 12.7</u>:

a\) Fill in the blanks with the correct term: (*pro-R, pro-S, re, si*).
You may want to review the terminology in section 3.11.

In the fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase reaction, the \_\_\_\_\_\_
proton on the α-carbon of DHAP is abstracted, then the \_\_\_\_\_\_ face
of the resulting enolate a-carbon attacks the \_\_\_\_\_\_ face of the
aldehyde carbon of GAP.

b\) Draw structures of the two other constitutional isomers that could
*hypothetically* form in aldol addition reactions between GAP and DHAP.
How many stereoisomers exist for these two alternative products?

Along with aldehydes and ketones, esters and thioesters can also act as
the nucleophilic partners in aldol reactions. In the first step of the
citric acid (Krebs) cycle, acetyl CoA (a thioester nucleophile) adds to
oxaloacetate (a ketone electrophile) (EC 2.3.3.8).

<img src="media/image300.emf" style="width:4.35208in;height:3.5in" />

fig 22

Notice that the nucleophilic intermediate is an *enol*, rather than a
zinc-stabilized enolate as was the case with the fructose
1,6-bisphosphate aldolase reaction. An enol intermediate is often
observed when the nucleophilic substrate is a thioester rather than a
ketone or aldehyde.

<u>12.3C: Going backwards: the retro-aldol cleavage reaction</u>

Although aldol reactions play a very important role in the formation of
new carbon-carbon bonds in metabolic pathways, it is important to
emphasize that they can also be reversible: in most cases, the energy
level of starting compounds and products are very close. This means
that, depending on metabolic conditions, aldolases can also catalyze
**retro-aldol** reactions: the reverse of aldol reactions, in which
carbon-carbon bonds are *broken*.

A retro-aldol cleavage reaction:

<img src="media/image301.emf"
style="width:3.79653in;height:1.15764in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image302.emf"
style="width:4.79653in;height:1.54653in" />

fig 24

In the retro-aldol cleavage reaction the β-hydroxy group is deprotonated
(step 1 above), to form a carbonyl, at the same time pushing off the
enolate carbon, which is now a leaving group rather than a nucleophile.

Is an enolate a good enough leaving group for this step to be chemically
reasonable? Sure it is: the same stabilizing factors that explain why it
can form as an intermediate in the forward direction (resonance
delocalization of the negative charge to the oxygen, interaction with a
zinc cation) also explain why it is a relatively weak base, and
therefore a relatively good leaving group (remember, weak base = good
leaving group!). All we need to do to finish the reaction off is
reprotonate the enolate (step 2) to yield the starting aldehyde, and we
are back where we started.

The key thing to keep in mind when looking at a retro-aldol mechanism is
that, when the carbon-carbon bond breaks, the electrons must have 'some
place to go' where they will be stabilized by resonance. *Most often,
the substrate for a retro-aldol reaction is a β-hydroxy aldehyde,
ketone, ester, or thioester*.

If the leaving electrons cannot be stabilized, a retro-aldol cleavage
step is highly unlikely.

<img src="media/image303.emf"
style="width:4.35208in;height:2.02778in" />

fig 26a

The fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase reaction we saw in the previous
section is an excellent example of an enzyme whose metabolic role is to
catalyze both the forward and reverse (retro) directions of an aldol
reaction. The same enzyme participates both as an aldolase in the
sugar-building gluconeogenesis pathway, and as a retro-aldolase in the
sugar breaking glycolysis pathway. We have already seen it in action as
an aldolase in the gluconeogenesis pathway. Here it is in the glycolytic
direction, catalyzing the retro-aldol cleavage of fructose bisphosphate
into DHAP and GAP:

The fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase reaction (retro-aldol direction)

<img src="media/image304.emf"
style="width:4.29653in;height:1.11111in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image305.emf"
style="width:4.80556in;height:1.82431in" />

fig 25

<u>Exercise 12.8</u>: Predict the products of a retro-aldol reaction
with the given substrate.

> <img src="media/image306.emf"
> style="width:2.26875in;height:0.57431in" />

fig 27

<u>12.3D: Aldol addition reactions with enzyme-linked enamine
intermediates</u>

Earlier we looked at the mechanism for the fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
aldolase reaction in bacteria. Interestingly, it appears that the enzyme
catalyzing the exact same reaction in plants and animals evolved
differently: instead of going through a zinc-stabilized enolate
intermediate, in plants and animals the key intermediate is an
*enamine*. The nucleophilic substrate is first linked to the enzyme
through the formation of an iminium with a lysine residue in the
enzyme's active site (refer to section 10.5 for the mechanism of iminium
formation). *This effectively forms an 'electron sink', in which the
positively-charged iminium nitrogen plays the same role as the
Zn<sup>+2</sup> ion in the bacterial enzyme.*

Mechanism for an aldol addition reaction with an enzyme-linked enamine
intermediate

<img src="media/image307.emf"
style="width:5.74097in;height:3.80556in" />

fig 28

The α-proton, made more acidic by the electron-withdrawing effect of the
imminium nitrogen, is then abstracted by an active site base to form an
enamine (step 1). In step 2 , the α-carbon attacks the carbonyl carbon
of an aldehyde, and the new carbon-carbon bond is formed. In order to
release the product from the enzyme active site and free the enzyme to
catalyze another reaction, the iminium is hydrolyzed back to a ketone
group (see section 10.5 to review the imine/imminium hydrolysis
mechanism).

There are many more examples of aldol/retroaldol reactions in which the
key intermediate is a lysine-linked imine. Many bacteria are able to
incorporate formaldehyde, a toxic compound, into carbohydrate metabolism
by linking it to ribulose monophosphate. The reaction (EC 4.1.2.43)
proceeds through imine and enamine intermediates.

<img src="media/image308.emf"
style="width:4.87986in;height:1.08333in" />

fig 29

<u>Exercise 12.9</u>: Draw the carbon-carbon bond-forming step for the
hexulose-6-phosphate aldolase reaction shown above.

Here is an example of an enamine intermediate retro-aldol reaction from
bacterial carbohydrate metabolism (EC 4.1.2.14). Notice that the
structures are drawn here in the Fischer projection notation - it is
important to practice working with this drawing convention, as
biologists and biochemists use it extensively to illustrate carbohydrate
chemistry. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.* **2001**, *98*, 3679

<img src="media/image309.emf"
style="width:2.19444in;height:1.44444in" />

fig 30

<u>Exercise 12.10</u>: Draw the carbon-carbon bond breaking step in the
reaction above. Use the Fischer projection notation.

**Section 4: α-carbon reactions in the synthesis lab - kinetic vs.
thermodynamic enolates**

While aldol addition reactions are widespread in biochemical pathways as
a way of forming carbon-carbon bonds, synthetic organic chemists working
the lab also make use of aldol-like reactions for the same purpose.
Consider this reaction:

<img src="media/image310.emf"
style="width:3.85208in;height:2.72222in" />

fig 30b

Here, cyclopentanone is deprotonated at an α-carbon by lithium
diisopropylamide (LDA), a very strong base commonly used in the
synthesis lab. Addition to the reaction mixture of an electrophile in
the form of a primary alkyl bromide results in formation of a new
carbon-carbon bond. Notice that this is a kind of 'S<sub>N</sub>2
variation' on the aldol addition reactions we saw above, because the
enolate nucleophile is attacking in S<sub>N</sub>2 fashion rather than
in a carbonyl addition fashion.

What would happen, though, if we started with 2-ethylcyclopentantone?
Because the starting ketone is no longer symmetrical, we could
hypothetically obtain two different products:

<img src="media/image311.emf"
style="width:3.22222in;height:2.96319in" />

fig 30c

It turns out that we can control which product we get by selecting the
base used in the reaction, and the reaction temperature. If we use LDA
and immerse the reaction flask in a dry ice-acetone bath (-78
<sup>o</sup>C), we get mainly 2,5-diethyl cyclopentanone. If we use
potassium hydride (KH) and run the reaction at room temperature, we get
mainly 2,2-diethylcyclopentanone.

LDA is a very *hindered* base: the basic nitrogen atom is surrounded by
two bulky isopropyl groups, and thus it is more difficult for it to come
into contact with an α-proton. The α-protons on the *less substituted*
side of 2-ethylcyclopentanone are less hindered and more accessible to
the base. In addition, the cold reaction temperature means that the
deprotonation step is *irreversible*: the system does not have enough
energy to overcome the energy barrier for the reverse (reprotonation)
reaction. The less substituted enolate forms faster, and once it forms
it goes on to attack the bromoethane rather then reversing back to the
ketone form. Because it is the *rate* of enolate formation that
determines the major product under these conditions, we say that this
reaction is under **kinetic control**, and the less substituted enolate
intermediate is called the **kinetic enolate**.

<img src="media/image312.emf"
style="width:3.40764in;height:3.24097in" />

fig 30d

If, on the other hand, we use KH as a base, hindrance is no longer an
issue because the base is a hydride ion. We run this reaction at room
temperature, so the system has enough energy to overcome the energy
barrier for re-protonation, and enolate formation is reversible. The
enolate in most abundance at equilibrium is therefore not the one that
forms fastest, but the one that is *more stable*. The *more substituted*
enolate is more stable (recall that alkenes are more stable when they
are more substituted - the same idea applies here). The more substituted
enolate leads to the 2,2-diethyl cyclopentanone product. Because it is
the *stability* of the enolate intermediate that determines the major
product under these conditions, we say that this reaction is under
**thermodynamic control**, and the more substituted enolate intermediate
is the **thermodynamic enolate**.

**Key learning objectives for this chapter**

Before moving on to the next chapter, you should:

Understand what is meant by 'α and β positions' relative to a carbonyl
group.

Understand how an enzyme can increase the acidity of an α-proton through
the active site microenvironment

Understand the 3D bonding arrangement of an enolate ion

Be able to recognize and draw reasonable mechanisms for the following
reaction types:

> tautomerizations: keto-enol, imine-enamine
>
> racemization/epimerization
>
> carbonyl isomerization (changing position of a carbonyl group)
>
> alkene isomerization (changing position of an alkene relative to
> carbonyl)
>
> aldol addition, retro-aldol cleavage (both enolate intermediate and
> enamine intermediate mechanisms)

Be able to draw a mechanism for a laboratory alkylation reaction at the
α-carbon of a ketone or aldehyde. Understand the difference between
kinetic and thermodynamic control of this reaction type, and be able to
predict the regiochemical outcome of the reaction based on reaction
conditions.

Problems

**P12.1:** The enzyme ribulose-5-phosphate isomerase (EC 5.3.1.6), which
is active in both the Calvin cycle and the pentose phosphate pathway,
catalyzes an aldehyde-to-ketone isomerization between two five-carbon
sugars.

a\) Draw a mechanism for this step.

<img src="media/image313.emf"
style="width:2.80556in;height:1.43542in" />

b\) What <sup>1</sup>H-NMR signal would most clearly differentiate the
aldose from the ketose in this reaction?

**P12.2:** Provide a likely mechanism for the reaction below, from
tryptophan biosynthesis (EC 5.3.1.24) *Hint*: this is mechanistically
very similar to a carbonyl isomerization reaction.

<img src="media/image314.emf"
style="width:4.65764in;height:1.04653in" />

**P12.3:**

**a)** Draw the product of an aldol addition reaction between pyruvate
and glyoxylate (EC 4.1.3.16):

<img src="media/image315.emf"
style="width:3.05556in;height:1.13889in" />

**b)** Draw the product of an aldol addition reaction between two
molecules of pyruvate (EC 4.1.3.17).

**c)** The molecule below undergoes a retroaldol cleavage reaction in
*E. coli* **(***J. Biol. Chem.* **2012,** *287***,** 36208). Draw the
structure of the products.

<img src="media/image316.emf"
style="width:2.86111in;height:0.57431in" />

**d)** Propose a mechanism for this early reaction in the biosynthesis
of isoprenoids (EC 2.3.3.10). *Hint*: this is an aldol reaction,
followed by thioester hydrolysis.

<img src="media/image317.emf"
style="width:3.99097in;height:0.87986in" />

**e)** The carbon-carbon bond cleaving reaction below was reported to
take place in many species of bacteria. Predict the structure of product
X, and draw a mechanism for the reaction. Assume that an imine linkage
to an enzymatic lysine residue does *not* play a part in the mechanism.
(*J. Bacteriol*. **2009**, *191*, 4158).

<img src="media/image318.emf" style="width:4.85208in;height:1in" />

**P12.4:** Below is a step in the biosynthesis of tryptophan. Draw a
likely mechanism. *Hint*: you will need to show an enamine to imine
tautomerization step first, then the carbon-carbon bond breaking step
will become possible.

<img src="media/image319.emf"
style="width:4.29653in;height:1.27778in" />

**P12.5:** The following step in the biosynthesis of lysine makes a
connection between aspartate semialdehyde and a common metabolic
intermediate. Identify the intermediate, and propose a mechanism for the
reaction.

<img src="media/image320.emf"
style="width:3.93542in;height:1.41667in" />

**P12.6:** Sugar-interconverting transaldol reactions play an important
role in sugar metabolism. In a transaldolase reaction, a ketose (e.g.
fructose-6-phosphate) first breaks apart in a retro-aldol step to
release an aldose (e.g. glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate) from the active
site. Then, in a forward aldol step, a second aldose (e.g.
erythrose-4-phosphate) enters the active site and connects to what
remains from the original ketose (the red part in the figure below) to
form a new ketose (e.g. sedoheptulose-7-phosphate). Transaldolase
enzymes generally have a lysine in the active site that is covalently
bound to the substrate throughout the reaction cycle.

Draw curved-arrow diagrams showing a) the carbon-carbon bond breaking
step of the reaction cycle, and b) the carbon-carbon bond forming step.

<img src="media/image321.emf"
style="width:5.13889in;height:2.10208in" />

**12.7:** Scientists are investigating the enzymatic reaction below,
which is part of the biosynthesis of the outer membrane of gram-negative
bacteria, as a potential target for new antibiotic drugs. Draw a likely
mechanism for the reaction. (*J. Biol. Chem.* **2008**, *283*, 2835).

<img src="media/image322.emf"
style="width:4.91667in;height:0.77778in" />

**12.8:** The reaction below, catalyzed by the enzyme malate synthase,
is part of the glyoxylate cycle of plants and some bacteria. It is the
glyoxylate cycle that allows these organisms to convert acetyl CoA,
derived from the metabolism of oils, into glucose.

<img src="media/image323.emf"
style="width:4.13889in;height:1.11111in" />

a\) Propose a mechanism.

b\) Predict the signals you would expect to see in a <sup>1</sup>H-NMR
spectrum of malate.

**P12.9** The reaction below, from the biosynthetic pathway for the
amino acid tryptophan, is dependent upon a coenzyme that we learned
about in an earlier chapter. Based on the reaction, identify this
coenzyme and propose a mechanism.

<img src="media/image324.emf"
style="width:3.94444in;height:1.29653in" />

**P12.10:** In the biosynthesis of leucine, acetyl CoA condenses with
another metabolic intermediate ‘X” to form 1-isopropylmalate (EC
2.3.3.13). Give the structure for substrate X, and provide a mechanism
for the reaction.

<img src="media/image325.emf"
style="width:2.47222in;height:0.77778in" />

**P12.11:**

a\) *Mycobacterium tuberculosis,* the microbe that causes tuberculosis,
derives energy from the metabolism of cholesterol from infected
patients. The compound below is predicted to be an intermediate in that
metabolic pathway, and to undergo a retro-aldol cleavage reaction.
Predict the retro-aldol products and show the mechanism involved.
(*Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol*. **2014**, *49*, 269, *fig 5*).

<img src="media/image326.emf"
style="width:3.41667in;height:1.36111in" />

b\) Polyketides are a structurally diverse class of biomolecules
produced by almost all living things. Many drugs are derived from
polyketide precursors. The cancer drug doxorubicin (trade name
Adriamycin) is derived from a bacterial polyketide called rhodomycinone.
Aklaviketone, an intermediate in the biosynthesis of rhodomycinone, is
derived in a single enzymatic step from akalonic methyl ester, in a
reaction in which the carbon-carbon bond indicated by an arrow is
formed. Predict the structure of akalonic methyl ester.

<img src="media/image327.emf"
style="width:4.68542in;height:1.71319in" />

**P12.12:** The unusual isomerization reaction shown below has been
reported recently to occur in some bacteria. Propose a mechanism that
begins with formation of an enolate intermediate. (*J. Biol. Chem*.
**2012**, *287*, 37986).

<img src="media/image328.emf"
style="width:3.04653in;height:1.33333in" />

**P12.13:** The reactions in parts a) and b) below both proceed through
lysine-linked enamine intermediates. Show the carbon-carbon bond forming
step for each reaction. *Hint*: you will want to consider the
straight-chain (ie. aldose/ketose) form of the sugars in both cases.

**a)** (*J. Bacteriol*. **2004**, *186*, 4185)

<img src="media/image329.emf"
style="width:3.97222in;height:1.44444in" />

**b) (***J. Biol. Chem.* **2011,** *286***,** 14057)

<img src="media/image330.emf"
style="width:5.77778in;height:1.10208in" />

**P12.14:** Suggest a mechanism for the following transformation from
aromatic amino acid biosynthesis (EC 4.2.3.4). Hint – only two
mechanistic steps are required.

<img src="media/image331.emf"
style="width:3.32431in;height:1.16667in" />

Interchapter

*(between chapter 12 and 13)*

Predicting metabolic pathways

Imagine that you are a biological chemist doing research on bacterial
metabolism. You and your colleagues isolate an interesting biomolecule
from a bacterial culture, then use mass spectrometry, NMR, and other
analytical techniques to determine its structure. Using your 'toolbox'
of known organic reaction types - nucleophilic substitution,
phosphorylation, aldol additions, and so forth - can you figure out a
chemically reasonable pathway by which your compound might be
enzymatically synthesized from simple metabolic precursors? In other
words, can you fill in the missing biochemical steps (or at least some
of them) to come up with a potential new metabolic pathway, which can
then be used a hypothesis for future experimental work to try to find
and study the actual enzymes involved?

An actual example approximating this scenario is shown below. A complete
biosynthetic pathway for isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP), the building
block molecule for all isoprenoid compounds (section 1.3A), has been
known since the 1960's. This pathway, which begins with acetyl-CoA, was
shown to be active in yeast, plants, and many other species including
humans. However, researchers in the late 1980s uncovered evidence
indicating that the known pathway is *not* present in bacteria, although
they clearly use IPP as a building block molecule just as other forms of
life do.

<img src="media/image332.emf"
style="width:5.80556in;height:4.30556in" />

fig 1a

Over the next several years, the researchers conducted a number of
experiments in which bacteria were grown on a medium containing glucose
'labeled' with the <sup>13</sup>C isotope. With the results from these
experiments, combined with their knowledge of common biological organic
reaction types, the researchers were able to correctly predict that the
bacterial pathway starts with *two* precursor molecules (pyruvate and
glyceraldehyde phosphate instead of acetyl CoA) and they also correctly
predicted the first two enzymatic steps of the newly discovered
bacterial pathway. This accomplishment eventually led to elucidation of
every step in the pathway, and isolation of the enzymes catalyzing them.
(*Biochem J*. **1993**, *295*, 517; *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **1996**, *118*,
2564; *Lipids* **2008**, *43*, 1095)

*Why weren't they able to predict the whole pathway? It turns out that
several of the later steps were somewhat unusual, unfamiliar reaction
types - but discovery of these reactions hinged upon the correct
prediction of the more familiar first two steps.*

Multi-step transformation problems of this type offer an unparalleled
opportunity to use our knowledge of biological organic chemistry
combined with creative reasoning to solve challenging, relevant
scientific puzzles. At this point in your organic chemistry career, you
have not yet accumulated quite enough tools in your reaction toolbox to
tackle most real-life biochemical pathway problems such as the one
addressed above - but by the time we finish with oxidation and reduction
chemistry in chapter 15, you will be able to recognize most of the
reaction types that you will encounter in real metabolism, and will be
challenged to predict some real pathways in the end-of-chapter problems.

You do, however, have *right now* enough of a bioorganic repertoire to
begin to learn how multi-step pathway problems can be approached, using
for practice some generalized, hypothetical examples in which the
reaction types involved are limited to those with which you are already
familiar.

Imagine that you want to figure out how an old-fashioned mechanical
clock is put together. One way to do this is to start with a working
clock, and take it apart piece-by-piece. Alternatively, one could start
with all of the disassembled pieces, plus a lot of other small parts
from different clocks, and try to figure out how to put together the
specific clock you are interested in. Which approach is easier? The
answer is intuitively obvious - it's usually easier to take things apart
than to put them back together.

The same holds true for molecules. If we want to figure out the
biosynthetic pathway by which a large, complex biomolecule might be made
in a cell, it makes sense to start with the finished product and then
mentally work backwards, taking it apart step-by-step using known,
familiar reactions, until we get to simpler precursor molecules.
Starting with a large collection of potential precursor molecules and
trying to put the right ones together to make the target product would
be a formidable task.

**Retrosynthetic analysis** - the concept of mentally dismantling a
molecule step by step all the way back to smaller, simpler precursors
using known reactions - is a powerful and widely-used intellectual tool
first developed by synthetic organic chemists. The approach has also
been adapted for use by biological chemists in efforts to predict
pathways by which known biomolecules could be synthesized (or degraded)
in living things.

In retrosynthesis, we think about a series of reactions in reverse. A
backwards (retro) chemical step is symbolized by a 'thick' arrow,
commonly referred to as a **retrosynthetic arrow**, and visually conveys
the phrase '*can be formed from*'.

<img src="media/image333.emf"
style="width:4.14444in;height:1.48889in" />

fig 2a

Consider a simple, hypothetical example: starting with the target
molecule below, can we come up with a chemically reasonable pathway
starting from the precursors indicated?

<img src="media/image334.emf"
style="width:4.19444in;height:1.10208in" />

fig 2b

A first step is to identify the relevant **disconnection**: a key bond
(usually a carbon-carbon bond) that must be formed to make the target
product from smaller precursors. We search our mental 'toolbox' of
common biochemical reaction types, and remember that the only way we
know of (so far!) to make a new carbon-carbon bond is through an aldol
addition reaction, which takes place at an α-carbon. Therefore, we can
make a likely disconnection next to the α-carbon in the target molecule.

Next, we need to recognize that the aldol addition reaction results in a
β-hydroxy ketone. But our target molecule is a β-*methoxy* ketone!
Working backwards, we realize that the β-methoxy group could be formed
from a β-hydroxy group by a SAM methylation reaction (section 8.8A).
This is our first retrosynthetic (backwards) step.

<img src="media/image335.emf"
style="width:3.57431in;height:0.74097in" />

fig 2c

The second retro step (aldol) accounts for the disconnection we
recognized earlier, and leads to the two precursor molecules.

<img src="media/image336.emf"
style="width:3.38889in;height:0.65764in" />

fig 2d

Now, consider the more involved (but still hypothetical) biochemical
transformation below:

<img src="media/image337.emf" style="width:4.55556in;height:1.25in" />

fig 3

Often the best thing to do first in this type of problem is to count the
carbons in the precursor compounds and product - this allows us to
recognize when extra carbons on either side must at some point be
accounted for in our solution. In this case, one carbon (labeled 'f'')
has been *gained* in the form of a methyl ether in the product. This is
easy to account for: we know that the coenzyme *S*-adenosyl methionine
(SAM - section 8.8A) often serves as the methyl group donor in enzymatic
*O*- or *N*-methylation reactions. So, we can propose our first
backwards (retro) step: the product as shown could be derived from
SAM-dependent methylation of an alcohol group on a proposed intermediate
I.

<u>Retrosynthetic step 1:</u>

<img src="media/image338.emf"
style="width:3.91667in;height:3.57431in" />

fig 4

How do we know that the methylation step occurs last? We don't -
remember, we are proposing a *potential* pathway, so the best we can do
is propose steps that make chemical sense, and which hopefully can be
confirmed or invalidated later through actual experimentation. For now,
we'll stick with our initial choice to make the methylation step the
last one.

Now that we have accounted for the extra carbon, a key thing to
recognize regarding the transformation in question is that two linear
molecules are combining to form a cyclic product. Thus, *two*
connections need to be made between reactants A and B, one to join the
two, the other to close the circle. Our primary job in the retro
direction, then, is to establish in the product the two points of
*disconnection*: in other words, to find the two bonds in the product
that need to be taken apart in our retrosynthetic analysis. Look closely
at the product: what functional groups do you see? Hopefully, you can
identify two alcohol groups, a methyl ether, and (critically) a *cyclic
hemiketal*. We've already accounted for the methyl ether. Identifying
the cyclic hemiketal is important because it allows us to make our next
'disconnection': we know how a hemiketal forms from a ketone and an
alcohol (section 10.2), so we can mentally work backwards and predict
the open-chain intermediate II that could cyclize to form our product.

<img src="media/image339.emf"
style="width:3.68542in;height:3.58333in" />

fig 5

Now, starting with the R<sub>1</sub> group and working along the carbon
chain, we can account for carbons a-e on the two precursors.

<img src="media/image340.emf" style="width:5in;height:1.47222in" />

fig 5a

Thus, *the next disconnection is between carbons b and c.* Here's where
our mastery of biological organic reactivity really comes into play: the
OH at carbon c of intermediate II is in the β position relative to
carbonyl carbon a. Aldol addition reactions (section 12.3) result in
β-hydroxy ketones or aldehydes. Therefore, we can work backward one more
step and predict that our intermediate II was formed from an aldol
addition reaction between intermediate III (as the nucleophile) and
precursor molecule A (as the electrophile).

<img src="media/image341.emf"
style="width:3.97222in;height:4.16667in" />

fig 6

We are most of the way home - we have successfully accounted for given
precursor A.

Intermediate III, however, is *not* precursor B. What is different? Both
III and B have a carbonyl and two alcohol groups, but the positioning is
different: III is an aldehyde, while B is a ketone. Think back to
earlier in this chapter: intermediate III could form from isomerization
of the carbonyl group in compound B (section 12.2A). We have now
accounted for our second precursor - we are done!

<img src="media/image342.emf"
style="width:3.80556in;height:3.24097in" />

fig 7

In the forward direction, a complete pathway diagram can be written as
follows:

<img src="media/image343.emf"
style="width:5.62986in;height:4.21319in" />

fig 8

A full 'retrosynthesis' diagram for this problem looks like this:

<img src="media/image344.emf"
style="width:5.88889in;height:4.49097in" />

fig 9

In the multi-step pathway prediction problems that you will be asked to
solve below and in the remainder of this book, you will be instructed to
present your solution in the form of a proposed 'forward' pathway
diagram, showing the participation of all coenzymes and other species
such as water. At first, we'll start with relatively simple,
hypothetical biochemical transformations. As you learn more reaction
types in chapter 13-17, the range and complexity of problems that you
will be able to solve will expand correspondingly, and you will
eventually be able to tackle real-life pathways.

Problems

For each transformation below, draw a pathway diagram illustrating a
potential biosynthetic pathway. Indicate other molecules participating
in the reaction but not shown below (eg. coenzymes, water, etc.). Each
step should be recognizable as a reaction type that we have covered
through the end of chapter 12. (Note - you are being asked to draw your
pathways in the 'forward' direction, but you should attack each problem
using a retrosynthetic analysis strategy).

*Solutions to these problems are available in 'Solutions to In-Chapter
Exercises'.*

**1:**

<img src="media/image345.emf"
style="width:4.41667in;height:1.13889in" />

**2:**

<img src="media/image346.emf"
style="width:3.61111in;height:0.96319in" />

**3**:

<img src="media/image347.emf"
style="width:5.47222in;height:1.24097in" />

**4:**

<img src="media/image348.emf"
style="width:3.91667in;height:1.13889in" />

**  
**

**5:**

<img src="media/image349.emf"
style="width:5.65764in;height:1.13889in" />

**6:**

<img src="media/image350.emf" style="width:3.71319in;height:1in" />

Chapter 13

Reactions at the α-carbon, part II

<img src="media/image351.jpeg" style="width:6in;height:3.14306in" />

Photo credit: http://www.mixedfitness.com/

**Introduction**

We begin this chapter with the story of two men, and two chemical
reactions.

The two men couldn't be more different. One was an acclaimed scientist
who lived and continued to work productively into his eighties. The
other was struck down as a young boy by what was assumed at the time to
be a fatal disease. With the heroic support of his parents and
caregivers, though, he lived to his thirtieth birthday and provided the
inspiration for development of a medical treatment that could
potentially save thousands of lives.

The two chemical reactions in this story are closely related, and both
involve the metabolism of fats in the human body. One serves to build up
fatty acid chains by repeatedly linking together two-carbon units, while
the other does the reverse, progressively breaking off two-carbon pieces
from a long chain fatty acid molecule. The life and work of the two men
are inextricably linked to the two reactions, and while we will be
learning all about the reactions in the main part of this chapter, we'll
begin with the stories of the two men.

On a Saturday in January of 2007, Dr. Hugo Moser passed away in the
Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, succumbing to pancreatic cancer. He
was 82 years old. A neurologist who had taught and researched for much
of his career at Johns Hopkins, he was well known for his workaholic
nature: he had signed off on his last grant application while on the way
to the hospital for major surgery just a few months previously. Two days
after his death, his wife and colleague Ann Moser was back in their lab,
because, she said, “He gave us all a mandate to continue with the work”.
Dr. Moser was a highly esteemed scientist who had devoted his life to
understanding and eventually curing a class of devastating
neurodegenerative diseases, most notably adrenoleukodystrophy, or ALD.
In his work he was careful, rational, painstaking, and relentless – a
classic scientist. But in the minds of many movie fans, he became a
Hollywood villain.

Only 17 months after the death of Dr. Moser, newspapers around the world
published moving obituaries marking the passing, at age 30, of Lorenzo
Odone. In one, written by his older sister and published in the British
newspaper The Guardian, Lorenzo as a young boy is described as “lively
and charming . . .he displayed a precocious gift for languages as he
mastered English, Italian and French. He was funny, articulate and
favored opera over nursery rhymes.” But for more than 20 years leading
up to his death, he had been confined to a wheelchair, blind, paralyzed,
and unable to communicate except by blinking his eyes. Because he was
unable to swallow, he needed an attendant to be with him around the
clock to suction saliva from his mouth so he wouldn't choke.

When he was he six years old, Lorenzo started to show changes in
behavior: a shortening attention span, moodiness. More disturbing to his
parents, Augusto and Michaela Odone, was their suspicion that he was
having trouble hearing. They took him in to be examined, and although
his hearing was fine, the doctors noticed other behavioral symptoms that
concerned them, and so ordered more neurological tests. The results were
a kick to the stomach: Lorenzo had a fatal neurodegenerative disease
called adrenoleukodystrophy. There was no cure; his nervous system would
continue to degenerate, and he would probably be dead within two years.

What happened next became such a compelling story that it was eventually
retold by director George Miller in the 1992 movie *Lorenzo's Oil*,
starring Nick Nolte and Susan Sarandon as Augusto and Michaela Odone and
Peter Ustinov as a character based on Dr. Hugo Moser. The Odones were
unwilling to accept the death sentence for their son and, despite having
no scientific or medical training, set about to learn everything they
could about ALD.

They found out that the cause of ALD is a mutation in a gene that plays
an important role in the process by which saturated fatty acids of 26 or
more carbons are broken down in the body. When these 'very long chain
fatty acids' (VLCFAs) accumulate to excessive levels, they begin to
disrupt the structure of the myelin sheath, a protective fatty coating
around nerve axons, leading eventually to degradation of the nervous
system.

Researchers had found that restricting dietary intake of VLCFAs did not
help – apparently much of the damage is done by the fats that are
naturally synthesized by the body from shorter precursors. The Odones
realized that the key to preventing destruction of the myelin sheath
might be to somehow disrupt the synthesis of VLCFAs in Lorenzo's cells.
The breakthrough came when they came across studies showing that the
carbon chain-elongating enzyme responsible for producing VLCFAs is
inhibited by oleic and erucic acids, which are monounsaturated fatty
acids of 18 and 22 carbons, respectively and are found in vegetable
oils.

<img src="media/image352.emf"
style="width:4.61111in;height:3.41667in" />

fig 38a

Administration of a mixture of these two oils, which eventually came to
be known as 'Lorenzo's Oil' , was shown to lead to a marked decrease in
levels of VLCFAs in ALD patients.

This was, however, a therapy rather than a miracle cure – and tragically
for the Odones and the families of other children afflicted with ALD,
the oil did not do anything to reverse the neurological damage that had
already taken place in Lorenzo's brain. Although he was profoundly
disabled, with round-the-clock care and a daily dosage of the oil
Lorenzo was able to live until a day after his 30<sup>th</sup> birthday,
22 years longer than his doctors had predicted.

The story does not end there. Although the discovery of the treatment
that bears his name came too late for Lorenzo Odone, might daily
consumption of the oil by young children who are at a high genetic risk
for ALD possibly prevent onset of the disease in the first place,
allowing them to live normal lives? This proposal was not without a lot
of controversy. Many ALD experts were very skeptical of the Lorenzo's
oil treatment as there was no rigorous scientific evidence for its
therapeutic effectiveness, and indeed erucic oil was thought to be
potentially toxic in the quantities ingested by Lorenzo. Most doctors
declined to prescribe the oil for their ALD patients until more studies
could be carried out. The Hollywood version of Lorenzo's story cast the
medical and scientific establishment, and Dr. Hugo Moser in particular,
in a strikingly negative light – they were portrayed as rigid, callous
technocrats who cared more about money and academic prestige than the
lives of real people. Dr. Moser was not mentioned by name in the movie,
but the character played by Peter Ustinov was based closely on him: as
his obituary in the Washington Post recounts, Dr. Moser once told an
interviewer "The good guys were given real names. The bad guys were
given pseudonyms."

What Hugo Moser in fact did was what a good scientist should always do:
he kept an open mind, set up and performed careful, rigorous
experiments, and looked at what the evidence told him. In a 2005 paper,
Moser was finally able to confidently report his results: when young
children at risk of developing ALD were given a daily dose of Lorenzo's
oil, they had significantly better chance of avoiding the disease later
on.

When he died, Dr. Moser was tantalizingly close to demonstrating
conclusively that a simple and rapid blood test that he and his team had
developed could reliably identify newborns at high risk of developing
ALD – but it was not until after his death that his colleagues,
including his wife, Ann Moser, were able to publish results showing that
the test worked. The hope is that many lives might be saved by routinely
screening newborns for ALD and responding with appropriate preventive
treatments - possibly including Lorenzo's oil.

The biochemical reactions at the heart of the Lorenzo's oil story – the
carbon-carbon bond forming and bond breaking steps in the synthesis and
degradation of fatty acids - both involve chemistry at the α-carbon and
proceed through enolate intermediates, much like the aldol and
isomerization reactions we studied in chapter 11. They are known as
'Claisen condensation' and 'retro-Claisen cleavage' reactions,
respectively, and represent another basic mechanistic pattern - in
addition to the aldol reaction - that is ubiquitous in metabolism as a
means of forming or breaking carbon-carbon bonds.

To begin this chapter, we will first learn about 'carboxylation' and
'decarboxylation' reactions, in which organic molecules gain or lose a
bond to carbon dioxide, respectively, in a mechanism that is really just
an extension of the aldol/retro-aldol reactions we learned about in the
previous chapter. As part of this discussion, we will work through the
mechanism of the carbon-fixing enzyme in plants commonly known as
'Rubisco', which is thought to be the most abundant enzyme on the
planet. Then, we will move to the Claisen reactions that are so central
to lipid metabolism and the story of Lorenzo Odone. Finally, we will
study 'conjugate additions' and 'β-eliminations', common reaction
patterns that involve double bonds in the α−β position relative to a
carbonyl group, and which, again, proceed via enolate intermediates.

**Section 13.1: Decarboxylation**

Many carbon-carbon bond-forming and bond-breaking processes in
biological chemistry involve the gain or loss, by an organic molecule,
of a single carbon atom in the form of CO<sub>2</sub>. You undoubtedly
have seen this chemical equation before in an introductory biology or
chemistry class:

6CO<sub>2(g)</sub> + 6H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>(l)</sub> + energy →
C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>12</sub>O<sub>6(aq)</sub> + 6O<sub>2(g)</sub>

This of course represents the photosynthetic process, by which plants
(and some bacteria) harness energy from the sun to build glucose from
individual carbon dioxide molecules. The key chemical step in plants in
which a carbon dioxide molecule is 'fixed' (linked to a larger organic
molecule) is a **carboxylation** reaction, and is catalyzed by the
enzyme ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase, commonly known as Rubisco.

The reverse chemical equation is also probably familiar to you:

C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>12</sub>O<sub>6(*aq*)</sub> + 6O<sub>2(*g*)</sub> →
6CO<sub>2(*g*</sub>) + 6H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>(*l*)</sub> + energy

This equation expresses what happens in the process known as
respiration: the oxidative breakdown of glucose to form carbon dioxide,
water, and energy (in a non-biological setting, it is also the equation
for the uncatalyzed *combustion* of glucose). In respiration, each of
the carbon atoms of glucose is eventually converted to a CO<sub>2</sub>
molecule. The process by which a carbon atom - in the form of carbon
dioxide - breaks off from a larger organic molecule is called
**decarboxylation**.

We will look now at the biochemical mechanism of decarboxylation
reactions. Later in the chapter, we will look at the carboxylation
reaction catalyzed by the Rubisco enzyme.

Decarboxylation steps occur at many points throughout central
metabolism. Most often, the substrate for a decarboxylation step is a
β-carboxy ketone or aldehyde.

Decarboxylation of a β-carboxy ketone or aldehyde:

<img src="media/image353.emf" style="width:2.75in;height:0.76875in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image354.emf" style="width:4.75in;height:1.71319in" />

fig 40

Just as in a retro-aldol reaction, a carbon-carbon bond is broken, and
the electrons from the broken bond must be stabilized for the step to
take place. Quite often, the electrons are stabilized by the formation
of an enolate, as is the case in the general mechanism pictured above.

The electrons from the breaking carbon-carbon bond can also be
stabilized by a conjugated imine group and/or by a more extensively
conjugated carbonyl.

<img src="media/image355.emf"
style="width:2.96319in;height:0.96319in" />

fig 42

The key in understanding decarboxylation reactions is to first mentally
'push' the electrons away from the carboxylate group, then ask yourself:
where do these electrons go? If the electrons cannot 'land' in a
position where they are stabilized, usually by resonance with an oxygen
or nitrogen, then a decarboxylation is very unlikely.

The compound below is *not* likely to undergo decarboxylation:

<img src="media/image356.emf"
style="width:3.24097in;height:2.13889in" />

fig 41

Be especially careful, when drawing decarboxylation mechanisms, to
resist the temptation to treat the CO<sub>2</sub> molecule as the
leaving group in a mechanistic sense:

<img src="media/image357.emf"
style="width:4.49097in;height:1.63889in" />

fig 43

The above is *not* what a decarboxylation looks like! (Many a point has
been deducted from an organic chemistry exam for precisely this
mistake!) Remember that in a decarboxylation step, it is the *rest* *of*
the molecule that is, in fact, the leaving group, 'pushed off' by the
electrons on the carboxylate.

Decarboxylation reactions are generally thermodynamically favorable due
to the entropic factor: one molecule is converted into two, one of which
is a gas - this represents an increase in disorder (entropy). Enzymatic
decarboxylation steps in metabolic pathways are also generally
irreversible.

Below are two decarboxylation steps (EC 1.1.1.42; EC 1.1.1.43) in
central catabolic metabolism (specifically the citric acid cycle and
pentose phosphate pathway catabolism, respectively). Each step
representing a point at which a carbon atom derived from the food we eat
is released as carbon dioxide:

<img src="media/image358.emf"
style="width:3.79653in;height:2.68542in" />

fig 44

<u>Exercise 13.1</u>:

Draw mechanistic arrows showing the carbon-carbon bond breaking step in
each of the reactions shown above.

The reaction catalyzed by acetoacetate decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.4) relies
on an imminium (protonated imine) link that forms temporarily between
the substrate and a lysine residue in the active site, in a strategy
that is similar to that of the enamine-intermediate aldolase reactions
we saw in chapter 12. (Recall from section 7.5 that the pKa of an
imminium cation is approximately 7, so it is generally accurate to draw
either the protonated imminium or the neutral imine in a biological
organic mechanism).

<img src="media/image359.emf"
style="width:5.36111in;height:1.40764in" />

fig 45

<u>Exercise 13.2</u>: Draw a mechanism for the carbon-carbon bond
breaking step in the acetoacetate decarboxylase reaction.

<u>Exercise 13.3:</u> Which of the following compounds could be expected
to potentially undergo decarboxylation? Draw the mechanistic arrows for
the decarboxylation step of each one you choose, showing how the
electrons from the breaking carbon-carbon bond can be stabilized by
resonance.

<img src="media/image360.emf"
style="width:4.38889in;height:2.99097in" />

fig45a

**Section 13.2: An overview of fatty acid metabolism**

In the introduction to this chapter, we learned about a patient
suffering from a rare disease affecting fatty acid metabolism. The
reaction mechanisms that we are about to learn about in the next two
sections are central to the process by which fatty acids are assembled
(synthesis) and taken apart (degradation), so it is worth our time to go
through a brief overview before diving into the chemical details.

Fatty acid metabolism is a two-carbon process: in the synthetic
directions, two carbons are added at a time to a growing fatty acid
chain, and in the degradative direction, two carbons are removed at a
time. In each case, there is a four-step reaction cycle that gets
repeated over and over. We will learn in this chapter about steps I and
III in the synthesis direction, and steps II and IV in the degradative
direction. The remaining reactions, and the roles played by the
coenzymes involved, are the main topic of chapter 15.

**Fatty acid synthesis:**

*'ACP' stands for 'acyl carrier protein', which is a protein that links
to growing fatty acid chains through a thioester group (see section
11.5A)*

Step I: Condensation (covered in section 13.3A)

<img src="media/image361.emf"
style="width:5.85208in;height:1.33333in" />

Step II: Ketone hydrogenation (covered in section 15.3)

<img src="media/image362.emf"
style="width:4.08333in;height:0.77778in" />

Step III: Elimination (covered in section 13.4)

<img src="media/image363.emf"
style="width:3.94444in;height:0.66667in" />

Step IV: Alkene hydrogenation (covered in section 15.4)

<img src="media/image364.emf"
style="width:4.02778in;height:0.71319in" />

. . . back to step I, add another malonyl-ACP, repeat.

fig 31a

**Fatty acid degradation:**

Step I: Alkane oxidation (covered in section 15.4)

<img src="media/image365.emf" style="width:3.75in;height:0.93542in" />

Step II: Addition of water (covered in section 13.4)

<img src="media/image366.emf"
style="width:3.71319in;height:0.69444in" />

Step III: Oxidation of alcohol (covered in section 15.3)

<img src="media/image367.emf"
style="width:3.77778in;height:0.63889in" />

Step IV: Cleavage (covered in section 13.3C)

<img src="media/image368.emf"
style="width:4.90764in;height:1.15764in" />

. . . back to step I

fig 31b

When looking at these two pathways, it is important to recognize that
they are *not* the reverse of each other. Different coenzymes are in
play, different thioesters are involved (coenzyme A in the degradative
direction, acyl carrier protein in the synthetic direction), and even
the stereochemistry is different (compare the alcohols in steps II/III
of both pathways). As you will learn in more detail in a biochemistry
course, metabolic pathways that work in opposite directions are
generally not the exact reverse of each other. In some, like fatty acid
biosynthesis, all of the steps are catalyzed by different enzymes in the
synthetic and degradative directions. Other 'opposite direction'
pathways, such as glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, contain mostly reversible
reactions (each catalyzed by one enzyme working in both directions), and
a few irreversible 'check points' where the reaction steps are different
in the two directions. As you will learn when you study metabolism in
biochemistry course, this has important implications in how two
'opposite direction' metabolic pathways can be regulated independently
of one another.

Recall that in Chapter 12 we emphasized the importance of two reaction
types - the aldol addition and the Claisen condensation - in their role
in forming (and breaking) most of the carbon-carbon bonds in a living
cell. We have already learned about the aldol addition, and its reverse,
the retro-aldol cleavage. Now, we will study the Claisen condensation
reaction, and its reverse, the retro-Claisen cleavage. Step I in fatty
acid synthesis is a Claisen condensation, and step IV in fatty acid
degradation is a retro-Claisen cleavage.

In section 13.4, we will look more closely at the reactions taking place
in step III of fatty acid synthesis (an elimination) and step II of
fatty acid degradation (a conjugate addition)

**Section 13.3: Claisen condensation**

<u>13.3A: Claisen condensation - an overview</u>

Recall the general mechanism for a nucleophilic acyl substitution
mechanism, which we studied in chapter 10:

<img src="media/image369.emf"
style="width:4.32431in;height:0.86111in" />

fig 31

The major points to recall are that a nucleophile attacks a carboxylic
acid derivative, leading to a tetrahedral intermediate, which then
collapses to expel the leaving group (X). The whole process results in
the formation of a different carboxylic acid derivative.

A typical nucleophilic acyl substitution reaction might have an alcohol
nucleophile attacking a thioester, driving off a thiol and producing an
ester.

<img src="media/image370.emf"
style="width:5.01875in;height:1.43542in" />

fig 32

If, however, the attacking nucleophile in an acyl substitution reaction
is the *α-carbon of an enolate*, a new carbon-carbon bond is formed.
This type of reaction is called a **Claisen condensation**, after the
German chemist Ludwig Claisen (1851-1930).

A Claisen condensation reaction

<img src="media/image371.emf"
style="width:4.74097in;height:1.10208in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image372.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.33547in" />

fig 33

In step 1, the α−carbon of one thioester substrate is deprotonated to
form an enolate, which then goes on to attack the second thioester
substrate (step 2). Then the resulting tetrahedral intermediate
collapses (step 3), expelling the thiol leaving group and leaving us
with a β-keto thioester product (a thioester with a ketone group two
carbons away).

To reiterate: *A Claisen condensation reaction is simply a nucleophilic
acyl substitution (Chapter 11) reaction with an **enolate** carbon
nucleophile.*

<u>13.3B: Biochemical Claisen condensation examples</u>

A Claisen condensation between two acetyl CoA molecules (EC 2.3.1.9)
serves as the first step in the biosynthesis of cholesterol and other
isoprenoid compounds in humans (see section 1.3A for a reminder of what
isoprenoids are). First, a transthioesterase reaction transfers the
acetyl group of the first acetyl CoA to a cysteine side chain in the
enzyme's active site (steps a, b). (This preliminary event is typical of
many enzyme-catalyzed Claisen condensation reactions, and serves to link
the electrophilic substrate covalently to the active site of the
enzyme).

In the 'main' part of the Claisen condensation mechanism, the α-carbon
of a second acetyl CoA is deprotonated (step 1), forming a nucleophilic
enolate.

<img src="media/image373.emf"
style="width:5.61111in;height:3.44444in" />

fig 34

The enolate carbon attacks the electrophilic thioester carbon, forming a
tetrahedral intermediate (step 2) which collapses to expel the cysteine
thiol (step 3).

<u>Exercise 13.4</u>: Draw curved arrows for the carbon-carbon
bond-forming step in mechanism for this condensation reaction between
two fatty acyl-thioester substrates. R<sub>1</sub> and R<sub>2</sub> can
be hydrocarbon chains of various lengths. (*J. Biol. Chem*. **2011**,
*286*, 10930.)

> <img src="media/image374.emf"
> style="width:4.49097in;height:0.99097in" />

fig 34a

In an alternative mechanism, Claisen condensations in biology are often
initiated by decarboxylation at the α−carbon of a thioester, rather than
by deprotonation:

Decarboxylation/Claisen condensation:

<img src="media/image375.emf"
style="width:4.30556in;height:0.86111in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image376.emf"
style="width:5.74097in;height:3.22222in" />

fig 45d

The thing to notice here is that the nucleophilic enolate (in red) is
formed in the first step by decarboxylation, rather than by
deprotonation of an α-carbon. Other than that, the reaction looks just
like the Claisen condensation reactions we saw earlier.

Now, we can finally understand the fatty acid chain-elongation step that
we heard about in the chapter introduction in the context of the
Lorenzo's oil story, which is a decarboxylation/Claisen condensation
between malonyl-ACP (the donor of a two-carbon unit) and a growing fatty
acyl CoA molecule. Notice that, again, the electrophilic acyl group is
first transferred to an active site cysteine, which then serves as the
leaving group in the carbon-carbon bond forming process.

Chain elongating (Claisen condensation) reaction in fatty acid
biosynthesis

*(step 1 in fatty acid synthesis cycle)*

<img src="media/image377.emf"
style="width:5.54653in;height:1.19444in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image378.emf" style="width:4.57431in;height:3in" />

fig 45b

<u>Exercise 13.5</u>: Curcumin is the compound that is primarily
responsible for the distinctive yellow color of turmeric, a spice used
widely in Indian cuisine. The figure below shows the final step in the
biosynthesis of curcumin. Draw a mechanism for this step.

<img src="media/image379.emf"
style="width:5.07431in;height:2.52778in" />

<u>13.3C: Retro-Claisen cleavage</u>

Just like the aldol mechanism, Claisen condensation reactions often
proceed in the 'retro', bond-breaking direction in metabolic pathways.

A typical Retro-Claisen cleavage reaction

(thiol nucleophile)

<img src="media/image380.emf" style="width:4.5in;height:0.96319in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image381.emf"
style="width:5.41667in;height:3.05556in" />

fig 35

In a typical retro-Claisen reaction, a thiol (or other nucleophile such
as water) attacks the carbonyl group of a β-thioester substrate (step
1), and then the resulting tetrahedral intermediate collapses to expel
an enolate leaving group (step 2) - this is the key carbon-carbon
bond-breaking step. The leaving enolate reprotonates (step 3) to bring
us back to where we started, with two separate thioesters. You should
look back at the general mechanism for a forward Claisen condensation
and convince yourself that the retro-Claisen mechanism illustrated
aboveis a step-by-step reverse process.

<u>Exercise 13.6</u>: Is a decarboxylation/Claisen condensation step
also likely to be metabolically relevant in the 'retro' direction?
Explain.

When your body 'burns' fat to get energy, it is a retro-Claisen cleavage
reaction (EC 2.3.1.16) that is responsible for breaking the
carbon-carbon bonds in step IV of the fatty acid degradative pathway. A
cysteine thiol on the enzyme serves as the incoming nucleophile (step 1
in the mechanism below), driving off the enolate leaving group as the
tetrahedral intermediate collapses (step 2). The enolate is then
protonated to become acetyl CoA (step 3), which goes on to enter the
citric acid (Krebs) cycle. Meanwhile, a transthioesterification reaction
occurs (steps a and b) to free the enzyme's cysteine residue,
regenerating a fatty acyl CoA molecule which is two carbons shorter than
the starting substrate.

The retro-Claisen reaction (step IV) in fatty acid degradation

<img src="media/image382.emf"
style="width:4.88889in;height:1.16667in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image383.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.99074in" />

fig 36

<u>Exercise 13.7</u>: In a step in the degradation if the amino acid
isoleucine, the intermediate compound 2-methyl-3-keto-butyryl CoA
undergoes a retro-Claisen cleavage. Predict the products..

<img src="media/image384.emf"
style="width:2.01875in;height:0.82431in" />

fig 36a

<u>Exercise 13.8</u>: Many biochemical retro-Claisen steps are
hydrolytic, meaning that water, rather than a thiol as in the example
above, is the incoming nucleophile that cleaves the carbon-carbon bond.
One example (EC 3.7.1.2) occurs in the degradation pathway for tyrosine
and phenylalanine:

<img src="media/image385.emf"
style="width:5.36111in;height:0.72222in" />

fig 36a

a\) Propose a likely mechanism for the reaction shown.

b\) The β-diketone substrate in the reaction above could hypothetically
undergo a different retro-Claisen cleavage reaction in which the
nucleophilic water attacks the other ketone group. Predict the products
of this hypothetical reaction.

**Section 13.4: Conjugate addition and β-elimination**

In this section, we will look at two more common biochemical reactions
that proceed through enolate intermediates. In a typical **conjugate
addition**, a nucleophile and a proton are 'added' to the two carbons of
an alkene which is conjugated to a carbonyl (i.e. in the α−β position).
In a **β-elimination** step, the reverse process occurs:

<img src="media/image386.emf"
style="width:3.85208in;height:0.76875in" />

fig 46

In chapter 9 we learned about nucleophilic carbonyl addition reactions,
including the formation of hemiacetals, hemiketals, and imines. In all
of these reactions, a nucleophile *directly* attacks a carbonyl carbon.

<img src="media/image387.emf"
style="width:2.41667in;height:1.30556in" />

fig 47

If, however, the electrophilic carbonyl is β-unsaturated - if, in other
words, it contains a double bond conjugated to the carbonyl - a
different reaction pathway is possible. A resonance structure can be
drawn in which the β-carbon has a positive charge, meaning that the
β-carbon also has the potential to be an electrophilic target.

<img src="media/image388.emf"
style="width:2.62986in;height:1.02778in" />

fig 48

If a nucleophile attacks at the β-carbon, an enol or enolate
intermediate results (step 1 below). In many cases this intermediate
collapses and the α-carbon is protonated (step 2). This type of reaction
is known as a **conjugate addition**.

Mechanism of a conjugate addition reaction

<img src="media/image389.emf"
style="width:4.58333in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 49

The reverse of a conjugate addition is a **β-elimination**, and is
referred to mechanistically the abbreviation **E1cb**.

Mechanism of an E1cB elimination

<img src="media/image390.emf" style="width:5in;height:1.32431in" />

fig 50

The E stands for 'elimination'; the numeral 1 refers to the fact that,
like the S<sub>N</sub>1 mechanism, it is a stepwise reaction with first
order kinetics. The 'cB' designation refers to the intermediate, which
is the **<u>c</u>**onjugate **<u>b</u>**ase of the starting compound. In
step 1, an α-carbon is deprotonated to produce an enolate, just like in
aldol and Claisen reactions we have already seen. In step 2, the excess
electron density on the enolate expels a leaving group at the β position
(designated 'X' in the figure above). Notice that the α and β carbons
change from *sp*<sup>3</sup> to *sp*<sup>2</sup> hybridization with the
formation of a conjugated double bond.

(In chapter 14 we will learn about alternate mechanisms for alkene
addition and β-elimination reactions in which there is *not* an adjacent
carbonyl (or imine) group, and in which the key intermediate species is
a resonance-stabilized carbo**cation**. )

Step II of fatty acid degradation is a conjugate addition of water, or
hydration.

<img src="media/image391.emf"
style="width:5.71319in;height:1.19444in" />

fig 51

Note the specific stereochemical outcome: in the active site, the
nucleophilic water is bound *behind* the plane of the conjugated system
(as drawn in the figure above), and the result is *S* configuration in
the β-hydroxy thioester product.

In step III of the fatty acid *synthesis* cycle we saw an E1cb
β-elimination of water (**de**hydration):

<img src="media/image392.emf"
style="width:5.55556in;height:1.34444in" />

fig 52

Notice that the stereochemistry at the β-carbon of the starting alcohol
is *R*, whereas the hydration pathway (step II) reaction in the fatty
acid degradation cycle pathway results in the *S* stereoisomer. These
two reactions are *not* the reverse of one another!

Here are two more examples of β-elimination reactions, with phosphate
and ammonium respectively, as leaving groups. The first,
3-dehydroquinate synthase (EC 4.2.3.4) is part of the biosynthesis of
aromatic amino acids, the second, aspartate ammonia lyase (EC 4.3.1.1)
is part of amino acid catabolism.

<img src="media/image393.emf" style="width:4.88889in;height:1.25in" />

fig 53

<img src="media/image394.emf"
style="width:4.98611in;height:1.54167in" />

fig 53b

[figure showing active site interactions for aspartate ammonia
lyase](http://pubs.acs.org/appl/literatum/publisher/achs/journals/content/bichaw/2011/bichaw.2011.50.issue-27/bi200497y/production/images/large/bi-2011-00497y_0005.jpeg)

*(Biochemistry* **2011**, *50*, 6055)

<u>Exercise 13.9:</u> In the glycolysis pathway, the enzyme 'enolase'
(EC 4.2.1.11) catalyzes the E1cb dehydration of 2-phosphoglycerate.
Predict the product of this enzymatic step.

<img src="media/image395.emf"
style="width:1.88889in;height:1.18542in" />

<u>Exercise13.10:</u> *N*-ethylmaleimide (NEM) is an irreversible
inhibitor of many enzymes that contain active site cysteine residues.
Inactivation occurs through conjugate addition of cysteine to NEM: show
the structure of the labeled residue. (Michael addition)

<img src="media/image396.emf"
style="width:0.85208in;height:1.35208in" />

fig 54

<u>Exercise 13.11</u>: Argininosuccinate lyase (4.3.2.1), an enzyme in
the metabolic pathway that serves to eliminate nitrogen from your body
in the form of urea in urine, catalyzes this β-elimination step:

<img src="media/image397.emf"
style="width:5.60208in;height:2.46319in" />

fig 54

Propose a complete mechanism. *Hint*: Don't be intimidated by the size
or complexity of the substrate - review the β-elimination mechanism,
then identify the leaving group and breaking bond, the α-carbon which
loses a proton, the carbonyl that serves to stabilize the
negatively-charged (enolate) intermediate, and the double bond that
forms as a result of the elimination. You may want to designate an
appropriate 'R' group to reduce the amount of drawing.

**Section 13.5: Carboxylation by the Rubisco enzyme**

It is difficult to overstate the importance to biology and ecology of
the enzymatic reaction we are going to see next: ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase (Rubisco) plays a key role in closing the
'carbon cycle' in our biosphere, catalyzing the incorporation of a
carbon atom - in the form of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere - into
organic metabolites and eventually into carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic
acids, and all of the other organic molecules in living things. Rubisco
is probably the most abundant enzyme on the planet.

You can think of a carboxylation reaction as essentially a special kind
of aldol reaction, except that the carbonyl electrophile being attacked
by the enolate is CO<sub>2</sub> rather than a ketone or aldehyde:

Mechanism for carboxylation of an enolate

<img src="media/image398.emf"
style="width:3.05556in;height:0.85208in" />

fig 38

Here is the full Rubisco reaction. Notice that the carbon dioxide (in
blue) becomes incorporated into one of the two phosphoglycerate
products.

The Rubisco reaction

<img src="media/image399.emf"
style="width:5.47222in;height:1.44444in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image400.emf"
style="width:6.00512in;height:2.96038in" />

fig 37 fig 39

The mechanism for the Rubisco reaction is somewhat involved, but if we
break it down into its individual steps, it is not terribly difficult to
follow. In step 1, an α-carbon on ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate is
deprotonated to form an enolate. In step 2, the oxygen at carbon \#3 is
deprotonated while the oxygen at carbon \#2 is protonated: combined,
these two steps have the effect of creating a different enolate
intermediate and making carbon \#2, rather than carbon \#3, into the
nucleophile for an aldol-like addition to CO<sub>2</sub> (step 3).
Carbon dioxide has now been 'fixed' into organic form - it has become a
carboxylate group on a six-carbon sugar derivative. Steps 4, 5, and 6
make up a hydrolytic retro-Claisen cleavage reaction (in other words,
water is the bond-breaking nucleophile) producing two molecules of
3-phosphoglycerate. Phosphoglycerate is channeled into the
gluconeogenesis pathway to eventually become glucose.

<u>Exercise 13.12</u>: Draw out the full mechanism for steps 4-6 in the
Rubisco reaction.

**Key learning objectives for this chapter**

Before moving on to the next chapter, you should:

Be able to draw reasonable mechanisms for reactions of the following
type:

Decarboxylation of a β-carboxy ketone or aldehyde

Claisen condensation and retro-Claisen cleavage

Hybrid decarboxylation-Claisen condensation

Conjugate addition

E1cb elimination

Understand (though not necessarily memorize) the fatty acid synthesis
and degradation cycles, and how the Claisen. retro-Claisen, conjugate
addition, and E1cb elimination steps fit in.

Be able to draw a complete mechanism for the Rubisco reaction.

Problems

**P13.1:** Tetrahydrolipastatin, a potent inhibitor of lipase enzymes
(see section 11.6) is being tested as a possible anti-obesity drug.
Lipastatin, a close derivative, is synthesized by the bacterium
S*treptomyces toxytricini*. The biosynthetic pathway involves the
following step shown below - draw a likely mechanism*.* ([*J. Biol.
Chem.* **1997**, *272*,
867](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8995375)).

<img src="media/image401.emf"
style="width:5.37986in;height:2.69444in" />

**P13.2:** The metabolism of camphor by some bacteria involves the step
below. Draw a likely mechanism. *(*[*J. Biol. Chem* **2004**, *279*,
31312](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15138275))

<img src="media/image402.emf"
style="width:2.87986in;height:0.97222in" />

**P13.3**: The glucogeogenesis pathway, by which glucose is synthesized
from pyruvate, begins with a reaction catalyzed by pyruvate carboxylase.
The enzyme requires the CO<sub>2</sub>-carrying biotin to function, but
the final step is thought to be the simple carboxylation of pyruvate by
free carbon dioxide (*Biochem. J.* **2008**, *413*, 369). Draw a
mechanism for this step.

<img src="media/image403.emf"
style="width:3.35208in;height:1.15764in" />

**P13.4:** Draw a reasonable mechanism for this decarboxylation step in
tryptophan biosynthesis (EC 4.1.1.45). *Hint*: a tautomerization step
precedes the decarboxylation.

<img src="media/image404.emf"
style="width:3.77778in;height:0.97222in" />

**P13.5:** The biosynthetic pathway for the antibiotic compound
rabelomycin begins with the condensation of malonyl CoA and acetyl CoA.
Predict the product of this reaction, and propose a likely mechanism.
(*Org. Lett.* **2010** *12*, 2814.)

<img src="media/image405.emf"
style="width:3.61111in;height:1.05556in" />

**P13.6** Predict the product of this decarboxylation step in the
biosynthesis of the amino acid tyrosine. *Hint*: think about comparative
stability when you are considering where protonation will occur!

<img src="media/image406.emf" style="width:2.5in;height:0.86111in" />

**P13.7:** Show a likely mechanism for this reaction from lysine
biosynthesis:

<img src="media/image407.emf"
style="width:3.96319in;height:0.91667in" />

**P13.8:** Compound A undergoes hydrolytic cleavage in some fungi to
form the products shown. Predict the structure of A. (*J. Biol. Chem*.
**2007**, *282*, 9581)

<img src="media/image408.emf"
style="width:3.41667in;height:0.91667in" />

**P13.9:** Propose a mechanism for the following reaction from the
gluconeogenesis pathway (EC 4.1.1.32):

<img src="media/image409.emf"
style="width:3.44444in;height:0.87986in" />

**P13.10:** Dehydroquinate undergoes dehydration (EC 4.2.1.10) in
aromatic amino acid biosynthesis. Experimental and genomic evidence
points to a lysine-linked iminium intermediate. More than one
dehydration product is possible for dehydroquinate, but in this case the
most stable product is the one that forms. Predict the structure of the
product, explain why it is the more stable of the possible dehydration
products, and draw a mechanism for its formation.

<img src="media/image410.emf"
style="width:2.51875in;height:1.40764in" />

**P13.11:** The enzyme catalyzing the reaction below, thought to
participate in the fermentation of lysine in bacteria, was recently
identified and characterized *(J. Biol. Chem*. **2011**, *286*, 27399).
Propose a likely mechanism. Hint: the mechanism involves two separate
carbon-carbon bond forming and bond breaking steps. C<sub>1</sub> of
acetyl CoA is identified with a red dot to help you trace it through to
the product.

<img src="media/image411.emf"
style="width:5.76875in;height:0.65764in" />

**P13.12:** Menaquinone (Vitamin K) biosynthesis in bacteria includes
the following step:

<img src="media/image412.emf" style="width:4.5in;height:1.16667in" />

Propose a likely mechanism. *Hint*: the mechanism involves a Claisen
condensation step which is unusual in that the electrophile is a
carboxylic acid group rather than a thioester. What is the driving force
that allows this unusual step to occur? (*J. Biol. Chem*. **2010**,
*285*, 30159)

**P13.13:** 4-maleylacetoacetate isomerase (EC 5.2.1.2) catalyzes the
following *cis* to *trans* alkene isomerization as part of the
degradation of the aromatic amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine.

<img src="media/image413.emf" style="width:4.5in;height:2.72222in" />

fig5

The enzyme uses the thiol-containing coenzyme glutathione, which is also
involved in the formation of disulfide bonds in proteins, but in this
case glutathione serves as a 'thiol group for hire'. The mechanism for
the reaction is essentially a reversible conjugate addition of
glutathione. Draw out the steps for this mechanism, showing how the
*cis-trans* isomerization could be accomplished. Also, explain why the
equilibrium for this reaction favors 4-fumarylacetoacetate. The
structure of glutathione is shown, but you can use the abbreviation GSH
in your mechanism.

**P13.14:** Based on the mechanistic patterns you have studied in this
chapter, propose a likely mechanism for this final reaction in the
degradation of the amino acid cysteine in mammals.

<img src="media/image414.emf"
style="width:4.21319in;height:1.08333in" />

**P13.15:** Propose a mechanism for the following carboxylation reaction
(EC 6.4.1.4) in the leucine degradation pathway. The complete reaction
is dependent on the CO<sub>2</sub>-carrying coenzyme biotin as well as
ATP, but assume in your mechanism that the actual carboxylation step
occurs with free CO<sub>2</sub> (you don’t need to account for the role
played by biotin or ATP).58, bottom)

<img src="media/image415.emf"
style="width:4.88889in;height:0.58333in" />

**P13.16:** Propose a mechanism for the following reaction, which is
part of the degradation pathway for the nucleotide uridine.

(

<img src="media/image416.emf" style="width:3in;height:1.01875in" />

**P13.17:** Illustrated below is a series of reactions in the
degradation pathway for the amino acid methionine. In step 1, an alcohol
group on C<sub>3</sub> is oxidized to a ketone, and in step 4 the ketone
is reduced back to an alcohol - we will study these reactions in chapter
X. In steps 2 and 3, the thiol (homocysteine) is replaced by water - but
this does NOT involve a nucleophilic substitution process.

a\) Draw a likely mechanism for step 2

b\) Draw a likely mechanism for step 3

c\) How does the involvement of the redox steps (steps 1 and 4) provide
evidence that overall substitution of water for homocysteine is not a
nucleophilic substitution?

<img src="media/image417.emf"
style="width:4.94444in;height:4.51875in" />

**P13.18**: (Challenging!) A recently discovered reaction in the
biosynthesis of rhizoxin, a potent virulence factor in the rice-seedling
blight fungus *Rhizopus microsporus, is illustrated below (Angewandte
Chemie* **2009**, *48*, 5001). The reaction takes place at the
intersection of two 'modules' of a multi-enzyme complex, and provides an
example of a biochemical conjugate addition step that results in the
formation of a new carbon-carbon bond (conjugate addition of a carbon
nucleophile is referred to as a **Michael addition**). Draw a likely
mechanism.

<img src="media/image418.emf" style="width:4.25in;height:2.77778in" />

**P13.19:**

a\) The 'acetoacetic ester synthesis' is a useful carbon-carbon
bond-forming reaction in the laboratory. The reaction mechanism is
described as α-carbon deprotonation to form an enolate, followed by
S<sub>N</sub>2 alkylation, ester hydrolysis, and decarboxylation. Below
is an example:

<img src="media/image419.emf"
style="width:5.72222in;height:0.77778in" /> Draw out a reasonable
mechanism, taking care to propose reactive intermediates that are
appropriate given the basic or acidic conditions present (note that the
reaction starts under basic conditions, then is later acidified).

b\) Suggest starting compounds for the synthesis of 4-phenyl-2-butanone
by the acetoacetic ester reaction.

c\) A very useful ring-forming reaction in laboratory synthesis is
called 'Robinson annulation' (Sir Robert Robinson was an English chemist
who won the 1947 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, and the term ‘annulation’
comes from the Latin *annulus*, meaning ‘ring’.) The reaction, which
takes place in basic conditions, consists of a conjugate (Michael)
addition step, followed by aldol addition and finally dehydration
(β-elimination of water). A typical example is shown below, with carbons
numbered to help you to follow the course of the reaction.

<img src="media/image420.emf"
style="width:3.68542in;height:0.88889in" />

Draw a mechanism for this reaction (when proposing intermediate species,
keep in mind that the reaction is occurring in a basic environment, and
choose protonation states accordingly).

d\) Propose starting compounds for the Robinson annulation synthesis of
the following product:

<img src="media/image421.emf"
style="width:1.35208in;height:0.61111in" />

**P13.20:** The reaction shown below, catalyzed by orotidine
monophosphate decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.23), is one of the most
extensively studied enzymatic transformations. It is known to occur
without the participation of any coenzymes.

<img src="media/image422.emf"
style="width:3.00903in;height:1.13889in" />

(

a\) Look at the reaction closely: what is unique about it?

b\) In 1997, a paper was published in which the authors predicted, based
on theoretical calculations, that this reaction proceeded through a
carbene intermediate (carbenes are not covered in this text – you may
need to look them up). This was prior to the publication of an x-ray
crystal structure. What kind of active site environment does this imply?

c\) When the crystal structure was published a few years later, we
learned that an aspartate residue (predicted to be negatively charged)
is positioned very near the substrate carboxylate group, and a lysine
residue (predicted to be positively charged) is positioned nearby on the
opposite side (see figure below). What roles do you think were predicted
for these two active site residues?

<img src="media/image423.emf"
style="width:3.00903in;height:1.87986in" />

**P13.21**: In the histidine degradation pathway, histidine undergoes
elimination of ammonia to form *trans*-urocanate. The enzyme catalyzing
this reaction (E.C. 4.3.1.3) has been shown to use an unusual
'coenzyme', 4-methylideneimidazole-5-one (MIO), which is formed from the
cyclization of an alanine-serine-glycine stretch of the enzyme itself.

A mechanism has been proposed in which the MIO coenzyme plays the role
of electron sink, and the intermediate shown below forms.

<img src="media/image424.emf"
style="width:5.09236in;height:1.91667in" />

Propose a full mechanism for this reaction according to this
information.

**P13.22:** The product that forms in the reaction between
[benzaldehyde](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benzaldehyde) and
[acetophenone](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acetophenone) (along with a
catalytic amount of sodium hydroxide) has a <sup>1</sup>H-NMR spectrum
in which all of the signals are between 7-8 ppm. Give the structure of
product.

**Chapter 14**

**Electrophilic reactions**

<img src="media/image425.jpeg" style="width:6in;height:4.49931in" />

**Memorial for Bridget Bishop, hanged as a witch in Salem,
Massachusetts**

photo credit: Melissa Nunez
(https://www.flickr.com/photos/143702874@N05/)

**Introduction**

Linnda Caporael probably should have paid a little more attention to the
graduation requirements in her college catalog. Going through the
graduation checklist during her senior year, she discovered to her
dismay that she still needed to fulfill a social science requirement, so
she promptly enrolled in an American History course. It was a decision
that would in time lead to her authoring a paper in a prestigious
scientific journal, being featured in a front page story in the New York
Times, and changing our understanding of one of the most intriguing -
and disturbing – episodes in American history.

Professor Caporael (Linnda went on to become a professor of Behavioral
Psychology at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute) recounted her story in
an episode of the PBS documentary series [*Secrets of the
Dead*](http://www.pbs.org/wnet/secrets/witches-curse-clues-evidence/1501/).
Early in the semester, she learned that as part of her history course
she would be required to complete a research paper on a topic of her own
choosing. She had recently seen a performance of *The Crucible*, Arthur
Miller's classic play about the Salem witch trials, and decided to do
her research on Anne Putnam, one of the young Salem girls who accused
several village women of bewitching them. The symptoms of 'bewitchment'
that afflicted the girls were truly frightening: thrashing and
convulsions, visions of snakes and ferocious beasts, a sudden inability
to speak, and a feeling that ants were crawling under their skin.

> These children were bitten and pinched by invisible agents: their
> arms, necks and backs turned this way and that way, and returned back
> again, so as it was, impossible for them to do of themselves, and
> beyond the power of any epileptick fits, or natural disease to effect.
> Sometimes they were taken dumb, their mouth flopped, their throats
> choaked, their limbs wracked and tormented. . .

*(From “A Modest Enquiry Into the Nature of Witchcraft” (1702) by
Reverend John Hale.*
<http://historyofmassachusetts.org/betty-parris-first-afflicted-girl-of-the-salem-witch-trials/>*)*

As Linnda continued to read accounts of the 'fits' afflicting the Salem
girls, she was suddenly struck by the similarities to another, more
recent episode that she had read about. In the summer of 1951, in the
French village of Pont Saint Esprit, a number of local people were
simultaneously seized by hallucinations, convulsions, and other symptoms
very much like those described during the Salem witch trials hundreds of
years earlier. Leon Armunier, a former postman in Pont Saint Esprit,
described his experience to the BBC:

> It was terrible. I had the sensation of shrinking and shrinking, and
> the fire and the serpents coiling around my arms . . .Some of my
> friends tried to get out of the window. They were thrashing wildly. .
> . screaming, and the sound of the metal beds and the jumping up and
> down... the noise was terrible. I'd prefer to die rather than go
> through that again.

There have been several explanations offered for what caused the Pont
Saint Esprit outbreak (including that the CIA was experimenting with
mass LSD poisoning as a form of chemical warfare), but the most widely
accepted theory is that the hallucinations were caused by eating bread
made from contaminated grain.

*Claviceps purpurea*, a fungus known to grow in rye and other grains,
produces a class of hallucinogenic compounds called 'ergot alkaloids'
which are derived from lysergic acid (the hallucinogenic drug LSD is a
synthetic derivative of lysergic acid). *Claviceps* thrives in damp
grain, and special care must be taken to avoid contamination when
storing grain grown during warm, rainy summers.

<img src="media/image426.emf"
style="width:5.49097in;height:3.07431in" />

fig 1a

Digging deeper into the records of the Salem witchcraft episode, Linnda
Caporael learned that the summer of 1691 was unusually damp. The first
cases of 'bewitchment' in Salem village occurred in the winter of
1691-1692, when the villagers would have been consuming grain stored
from the previous summer. Rye, the kind of grain most vulnerable to
*Claviceps* contamination, was the staple crop in Salem at the time.
Furthermore, nearly all of the affected girls lived on farms on the
swampy western edge of the town, where *Claviceps* contamination would
have been most likely to occur.

This was all circumstantial evidence, to be sure, but it was enough to
convince Linnda that ergot poisoning was much more plausible as a root
cause of the behavior of the afflicted girls than simply mass hysteria,
which had long been the accepted theory. She summarized her findings in
a paper that was later published in the journal *Science*, with the
colorful title "Ergotism: The Satan Loosed in Salem?" (*Science*
**1976**, *192*, 21). Her theory is still not universally accepted, but
scientists and historians are for the most part in agreement that ergot
poisoning was the cause of other outbreaks of convulsions and
hallucinations, often called 'Saint Anthony's Fire', that have occurred
throughout European history. It is possible that ergot poisoning may
have played a role in literature as well: professor Caporael, in an
interview with PBS, recounts how she was recently contacted by an
historian with in intriguing idea. Is it possible that Caliban, the
wild, half-human character in Shakespeare's *The Tempest* who is
tormented by hallucinations inflicted upon him by the wizard Prospero,
could be a literary manifestation of ergot poisoning episodes that
occurred in England during Shakespeare's time?

> For every trifle are they set upon me;  
> Sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me  
> And after bite me, then like hedgehogs which  
> Lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount  
> Their pricks at my footfall; sometime am I  
> All wound with adders who with cloven tongues  
> Do hiss me into madness.

*(*William Shakespeare's *The Tempest*, Act II scene ii)

In this chapter, we will learn about a class of organic reaction that is
central to the biosynthesis of ergot alkaloids in *Claviceps*. The key
first step in the biosynthetic pathway is a reaction unlike any we have
yet seen:

<img src="media/image427.emf"
style="width:5.16667in;height:4.51875in" />

fig 1b

As you can see, the first step is condensation between the amino acid
tryptophan and dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP), the building block
molecule for isoprenoids (section 1.3A). What you should also notice in
the reaction figure above is that a new carbon-carbon bond is formed,
and yet the chemistry involved is clearly very different from the
carbon-carbon bonding forming aldol additions and Claisen condensations
we learned about in the previous two chapters: there is no carbonyl to
be found anywhere near the site of reaction, and one of the bond-forming
carbons is part of an aromatic ring.

We will see later in this chapter that this reaction mechanism is
classified as an 'electrophilic aromatic substitution', and is one of a
broader family of organic reaction mechanisms that includes
electrophilic additions, substitutions, and isomerizations.
'Electrophilic' is the key term here: in organic chemistry, an
'electrophilic' reaction mechanism is one in which the π-bonded
electrons in a carbon-carbon double (or sometimes triple) bond are drawn
towards an electron-poor species, often an acidic proton or carbocation.
In essence, the π bond is acting as a nucleophile or base.

<img src="media/image428.emf"
style="width:5.87986in;height:1.11111in" />

fig 1

Notice above that, once the π bond breaks and a new  bond forms, the
second carbon that was part of the original π bond becomes a
carbocation. Carbocation intermediates play a critical role in this
chapter, because a carbocation is a highly reactive species and will
quickly attract a pair of electrons. The stability of the carbocation
intermediate (recall that we learned about carbocation stability in
section 8.5), and the manner in which it accepts a pair of electrons,
plays a key role in determining the outcome of the reaction.

**Section 14.1: Electrophilic addition**

<u>14.1A: Addition of HBr to alkenes</u>

The simplest type of electrophilic reaction to visualize is the addition
of a haloacid such as HBr to an isolated alkene. It is not a biological
reaction, but nonetheless can serve as a convenient model to introduce
some of the most important ideas about electrophilic reactions.

Electrophilic addition of HBr to an alkene:

<img src="media/image429.emf"
style="width:4.12986in;height:1.33333in" />

fig 1

Step 1 is an acid-base reaction: the π electrons of the alkene act as a
base and extract the acidic proton of HBr. This leaves one of the
carbons with a new bond to hydrogen, and the other with an incomplete
octet and a positive formal charge. In step 2, the nucleophilic bromide
anion attacks the electrophilic carbocation to form a new carbon-bromine
bond. Overall, the HBr molecule - in the form of a proton and a bromide
anion - has been *added* to the double bond.

To understand how π-bonded electrons in an alkene could be basic, let's
first review the bonding picture for alkenes. Recall (section 2.1C) that
the both of the carbons in an alkene group are *sp<sup>2</sup>*
hybridized, meaning that each carbon has three *sp<sup>2</sup>* hybrid
orbitals extending out in the same plane at 180<sup>o</sup> angles
(trigonal planar geometry), and a single, unhybridized *p* orbital
oriented perpendicular to that plane - one lobe above the plane, one
lobe below.

<img src="media/image430.emf"
style="width:1.24097in;height:1.33333in" />

fig 2

The unhybridized *p* orbitals on the two alkene carbons overlap, in a
side-by-side fashion, to form the π bond, which extends above and below
the plane formed by the σ bonds. The two electrons shared in this π bond
are farther away from the carbon nuclei than the electrons in the
carbon-carbon σ bond, and thus are more accessible to the acidic proton.
In addition, recall that molecular orbital (MO) theory tells us that π
orbitals are higher in energy than σ orbitals (section 2.2). As a
consequence, it is easier to break the π bond of an alkene than it is to
break the σ bond: the π bond is more reactive.

As the HBr molecule approaches the alkene, a new σ bond is formed
between one of the alkene carbons and the electron-poor proton from HBr.
The carbon, which was *sp<sup>2</sup>* hybridized when it was part of
the alkene, is now *sp<sup>3</sup>* hybridized. The other alkene carbon
is still *sp<sup>2</sup>* hybridized, but it now bears a positive formal
charge because it has only three bonds, and its *p* orbital is empty.
But it won't stay empty for long: a carbocation is a very reactive,
unstable intermediate. The bromide ion will rapidly act as a
nucleophile, filling the orbital with a pair of electrons, and now with
four σ bonds the carbon is *sp<sup>3</sup>*-hybridized.

The first step in the electrophilic addition reaction is much slower
than the second step, because the intermediate carbocation species is
higher in energy than either the reactants or the products, and as a
result the energy barrier for the first step is also higher than for the
second step. The slower first step is the rate-determining step: a
change in the rate of the slow step will effect the rate of the overall
reaction, while a change in the rate of the fast step will not.

<img src="media/image431.emf"
style="width:4.44444in;height:2.85208in" /> (fig 3)

fig 2a

It is important to recognize the inherent difference between an
*electrophilic* addition to an alkene and a *conjugate* addition to an
alkene in the  position, the latter of which we studied earlier in
section 13.4. In both reactions, a proton and a nucleophile add to the
double bond of an alkene. In a conjugate addition, the nucleophilic
attack takes place first, resulting in a negatively charged intermediate
(an enolate). Protonation is the *second* step. Also, of course, the
alkene must be conjugated to a carbonyl or imine.

<img src="media/image432.emf" style="width:5.25in;height:3.75in" />

fig 3

In an electrophilic addition, proton abstraction occurs *first*,
generating a positively-charged intermediate. Nucleophilic attack is the
second step. No conjugated carbonyl or imine group is required: in fact
a nearby carbonyl group would actually slow down a hypothetical
electrophilic addition reaction down because a carbonyl is an electron
withdrawing, carbocation-destabilized group.

<u>14.1B:The stereochemistry of electrophilic addition</u>

Depending on the structure of the starting alkene, electrophilic
addition has the potential to create two new chiral centers. Addition of
HBr to an alkene is *not* stereoselective: the reaction results in
racemization at *both* of the alkene carbons. Consider the addition of
HBr to *cis*-3,4-dimethyl-3-hexene. The initial proton abstraction step
creates a new chiral center, and because the acidic proton could be
added to either side of the planar alkene carbon with equal probability,
the center could have either *S* or *R* configuration.

<img src="media/image433.emf"
style="width:5.16667in;height:4.35208in" />

fig 4

Likewise, in the second step the nucleophilic bromide ion could attack
from either side of the planar carbocation, leading to an equal mixture
of S and R configuration at that carbon as well. Therefore, we expect
the product mixture to consist of equal amounts of four different
stereoisomers.

<u>Exercise 14.1</u>: Predict the product(s) of electrophilic addition
of HBr to the following alkenes. Draw all possible stereoisomers that
could form, and take care not to draw identical structures twice.

a\) *trans*-2-butene b) *cis*-3-hexene c) cyclopentene

<u>14.1C: The regiochemistry of electrophilic addition</u>

In many cases of electrophilic addition to an alkene, regiochemistry
comes into play: the reaction can result in the formation of two
different constitutional isomers. Consider the electrophilic addition of
HBr to 2-methylpropene:

(fig 4)

<img src="media/image434.emf"
style="width:5.12986in;height:2.04653in" />

fig 5

Note that carbon \#1 and carbon \#2 in the starting alkene are *not* the
same - carbon \#2 is bonded to two methyl groups, and carbon \#1 to two
hydrogen atoms. The initial protonation step could therefore go two
different ways, resulting in two different carbocation intermediates.
Notice how pathway '**a**' gives a tertiary carbocation intermediate
(I<sub>a</sub>), while pathway '**b**' gives a primary carbocation
intermediate (I<sub>b</sub>) We know from section 8.5 that the tertiary
carbocation I<sub>a</sub> is lower in energy. Consequently, the
transition state TS(a) leading to I<sub>a</sub> is lower in energy than
TS(b), meaning that I<sub>a</sub> forms *faster* than I<sub>b</sub>.

<img src="media/image435.emf" style="width:3.75in;height:2.57431in" />

fig 6

Because the protonation step is the rate determining step for the
reaction, tertiary alkyl bromide A will form faster than the primary
alkyl bromide B, and thus A will be the predominant product of the
reaction. *The electrophilic addition of HBr to 2-methylpropene is
regioselective: more than one constitutional isomer can potentially
form, but one isomer is favored over the other.* It is generally
observed that in electrophilic addition of haloacids to alkenes, the
more substituted carbon is the one that ends up bonded to the heteroatom
of the acid, while the less substituted carbon is protonated. This 'rule
of thumb' is known as **Markovnikov's rule**, after the Russian chemist
Vladimir Markovnikov who proposed it in 1869.

While it is useful in many cases, Markovikov's rule does not apply to
all electrophilic addition reactions. It is better to use a more general
principle:

**The regioselectivity of electrophilic addition**

When an asymmetrical alkene undergoes electrophilic addition, the
product that predominates is the one that results from the more stable
of the two possible carbocation intermediates.

How is this different from Markovnikov's original rule? Consider the
following hypothetical reaction, in which the starting alkene
incorporates two trifluoromethyl substituents:

<img src="media/image436.emf"
style="width:4.55556in;height:2.46319in" />

fig 7

Now when HBr is added, it is the *less* substituted carbocation that
forms faster in the rate-determining protonation step, because in this
intermediate the carbon bearing the positive charge is located further
away from the electron-withdrawing, cation-destabilizing fluorines. As a
result, the predominant product is the secondary rather than the
tertiary bromoalkane. This is referred to as an **anti-Markovnikov**
addition product, because it 'breaks' Markovnikov's rule.

If the two possible carbocation intermediates in an electrophilic
addition reaction are of similar stability, the product will be a
mixture of constitutional isomers.

<img src="media/image437.emf" style="width:5.61111in;height:2.25in" />

fig 8

<u>14.1D: Electrophilic addition of water and alcohol</u>

The (non-biochemical) addition of water to an alkene is very similar
mechanistically to the addition of a haloacid such as HBr or HCl, and
the same stereochemical and regiochemical principles apply. A catalytic
amount of a strong acid such as phosphoric or sulfuric acid is required,
so that the acidic species in solution is actually
H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup>. Note that H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup> is
regenerated in the course of the reaction.

<img src="media/image438.emf"
style="width:5.13889in;height:2.47222in" />

fig 9

If an alkene is treated with methanol and a catalytic amount of strong
acid, the result is an ether:

<img src="media/image439.emf"
style="width:4.35208in;height:1.35208in" />

fig 10

<u>Exercise 14.2</u>: Draw a mechanism for the ether-forming reaction
above.

<u>14.1E: Addition to conjugated alkenes</u>

Electrophilic addition to conjugated alkenes presents additional
regiochemical possibilities, due to resonance delocalization of the
allylic carbocation intermediate. Addition of one molar equivalent of
HBr to 1,3-butadiene, for example, leads to a mixture of three products,
two of which are a pair of enantiomers due to the creation of a chiral
center at carbon \#2.

<img src="media/image440.emf" style="width:5.5in;height:1.88889in" />

<u>Exercise 14.3</u>: Explain why 4-bromo-1-butene is *not* a
significant product of the reaction above.

<u>Exercise 14.4</u>: Predict the major product(s) of the following
reactions. Draw all possible stereoisomers, and take care not to draw
the same structure twice.

a\)

<img src="media/image441.emf"
style="width:2.57431in;height:0.55556in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image442.emf"
style="width:2.77778in;height:0.55556in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image443.emf"
style="width:2.63889in;height:0.83333in" />

d\) *Hint* - are the double bonds in an aromatic ring likely to undergo
electrophilic addition?

<img src="media/image444.emf"
style="width:3.07431in;height:0.57431in" />

e\)

<img src="media/image445.emf"
style="width:2.85208in;height:0.55556in" />

ig 12

<u>14.1F: Biochemical electrophilic addition reactions</u>

Myrcene is an isoprenoid compound synthesized by many different kinds of
plants and used in the preparation of perfumes. Recently an enzymatic
pathway for the degradation of myrcene has been identified in bacteria
(*J. Biol. Chem* **2010**, *285*, 30436). The first step of this pathway
is electrophilic addition of water to a conjugated alkene system.

<img src="media/image446.emf"
style="width:4.21319in;height:0.94444in" />

fig 15

<u>Exercise 14.5</u>: Draw a mechanism for the above reaction, showing
two resonance contributors of the carbocation intermediate. How would
you characterize the intermediate?

Although the hydration of myrcene above looks very familiar, many
enzyme-catalyzed electrophilic addition reactions differ from what we
have seen so far, in that the electron-poor species attacked by the
π-bonded electrons in the initial step is a *carbocation* rather than an
acidic proton:

<img src="media/image447.emf"
style="width:5.37986in;height:1.37986in" />

fig 13

*lpha*-terpineol, a major component in the sap of pine trees, is formed
in an electrophilic addition reaction. The first thing that happens
(which we will refer to below as 'step a', in order to keep the step
numbering consistent what the addition mechanisms we have seen so far)
is departure of a pyrophosphate leaving group, forming an allylic
carbocation electrophile.

<img src="media/image448.emf" style="width:6in;height:3.30213in" />

fig 14

The actual electrophilic addition stage of the reaction begins with step
1, as the π electrons an alkene are drawn toward one of the two carbons
that share the positive charge, effectively closing a six-membered ring.
A water molecule then attacks the second carbocation intermediate (step
2), which completes the addition process.

Notice something important about the regiochemical course of the
reaction: step 1 results in the formation of a six-membered ring and a
tertiary carbocation. As we have stressed before, biochemical reactions
tend to follow energetically favorable mechanistic pathways.

<u>Exercise 14.6</u>: An alternate regiochemical course to step 1 shown
above could result in a seven-membered ring and a secondary carbocation,
a much less energetically favorable intermediate in terms of both
carbocation stability and ring size. Draw a mechanism for this
hypothetical alternate reaction, and show the product that would result
after the addition of water in a hypothetical 'step 2'.

**Section 14.2: Elimination by the E1 mechanism**

<u>14.2A: E1 elimination - an overview</u>

The reverse of electrophilic addition is called **E1 elimination**. We
will begin by looking at some non-biochemical E1 reactions, as the E1
mechanisms is actually somewhat unusual in biochemical pathways.

E1 elimination:

<img src="media/image449.emf"
style="width:4.37986in;height:1.08333in" />

fig 16

An E1 elimination begins with the departure of a leaving group
(designated 'X' in the general figure above) and formation of a
carbocation intermediate (step 1). Abstraction of a proton from an
adjacent carbon (step 2) sends two electrons down to fill the empty *p*
orbital of the carbocation, forming a new π bond. The base in this step
may be the leaving group, or another basic species in solution.

E1 elimination does not occur when the leaving group is bonded to a
primary carbon, unless the carbon is in the allylic or benzylic
position. Recall that a primary carbocation, unless stabilized by
resonance, is highly unstable and an unlikely reaction intermediate.

E1 eliminations can occur at secondary carbons, however. If cyclohexanol
is heated with a catalytic amount of phosphoric acid, elimination of
water (dehydration) results in cyclohexene as the product. The role of
the phosphoric acid is to protonate the alcohol ('step a' below), making
it a viable leaving group.

<img src="media/image450.emf"
style="width:5.65764in;height:2.97222in" />

fig 17

The reaction is reversible, but if cyclohexene is distilled away from
the reaction mixture as it forms, the equilibrium can be driven towards
product (you may want to review Le Chatelier's principle in your General
Chemistry textbook). Separation of cyclohexene (boiling point 83
<sup>o</sup>C) from cyclohexanol (boiling point 161 <sup>o</sup>C) is
simple because of the large difference in boiling points between the two
liquids.

<u>Exercise 14.7</u>: When the laboratory reaction described above is
run to completion, a viscous 'goop' is usually left over in the
distillation flask, which hardens upon cooling. Draw a mechanism showing
how this 'goop' might form, and explain why it hardens upon cooling.

<u>14.2B: Regiochemistry of E1 elimination</u>

Nonenzymatic E1 reactions can often result in a mixture of more than one
alkene product. Elimination of 'HX' from the following starting
compound, for example, could yield three different possible alkene
products.

<img src="media/image451.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.92695in" />

fig 18

Notice in the figure above that the three possible E1 products do not
form in equal abundance. *The most abundant alkene product is that which
is most substituted*: in other words, the alkene in which the two
*sp<sup>2</sup>* carbons are bonded to the fewest hydrogen atoms. In
this case, the most substituted alkene has zero hydrogen substituents.
The least substituted - and least abundant - alkene product has two
hydrogen substituents, while the middle alkene has one hydrogen
substituent. This trend is observed generally with nonenzymatic E1
elimination reactions, and is known as **Zaitsev's rule** after the
Russian chemist Alexander Zaitsev.

<u>14.2C: Stereochemistry of E1 elimination</u>

Nonenzymatic E1 reactions can also result in both *cis* and *trans*
alkenes. Keeping in mind that in general *trans* alkenes are more stable
than *cis* alkenes, we can predict that *trans* alkenes will predominate
in the product mixture.

<img src="media/image452.emf"
style="width:5.08333in;height:1.16667in" />

fig 19

<u>Exercise 14.8</u>: Draw the structures of all possible E1 products
starting with the compounds below, and rank them in order of highest to
lowest abundance.

<img src="media/image453.emf"
style="width:4.43542in;height:1.30556in" />

fig 20

<u>14.2D: The E2 elimination mechanism</u>

When a strong base is combined with an alkyl halide (or alkyl
tosylate/mesylate), elimination generally occurs by the **E2 pathway**,
in which proton abstraction and loss of the leaving group occur
*simultaneously*, without an intervening carbocation intermediate:

<img src="media/image454.emf"
style="width:5.12986in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 20a

Just like in the S<sub>N</sub>2 mechanism, the '2' in the E2 designation
refers to the idea that the rate-determining (and only) step of the
reaction is a collision between the two reacting molecules, in this case
bromocyclohexane and methoxide ion.

<u>14.2E: Competition between elimination and substitution</u>

Consider a reaction between water and bromocyclohexane. Based on what we
have just learned, a likely product would be the alkene formed from an
E1 elimination reaction (pathway (a) in red below).

<img src="media/image455.emf"
style="width:4.32431in;height:2.16667in" />

fig 20c

However, the reaction could take another course: what if the water
molecule, instead of acting as a base, were to act as a nucleophile
(pathway (b) in blue? This should look familiar - it is simply an
S<sub>N</sub>1 reaction (section 8.1B). In fact, the reaction would
result in a mixture of elimination (E1) and substitution
(S<sub>N</sub>1) products. This is a common theme: elimination and
substitution often compete with each other.

When both elimination and substitution products are possible, however,
we can often predict which reaction will predominate. In general,
*strong bases and hindered carbons favor elimination, while powerful
nucleophiles and unhindered carbons favor substitution*.

<img src="media/image456.emf"
style="width:4.54653in;height:4.97222in" />

fig 20b

In addition, primary alkyl halides are much more likely to undergo
substitution than elimination, even when the nucleophile is also a
strong base, because the electrophilic carbon is unhindered and
accessible to the nucleophile. Recall that the Williamson ether
synthesis (section 8.9A) is an efficient laboratory S<sub>N</sub>2
reaction between a primary (or methyl) alkyl halide and an alkoxide. If
a secondary alkyl halide is used, a substantial amount of elimination
product will form (the electrophilic carbon is more hindered, and the
alkoxide will act as a base as well as a nucleophile).

<img src="media/image457.emf"
style="width:4.71319in;height:2.07431in" />

fig 20e

While competition between substitution and elimination pathways is an
issue for chemists running reactions in the lab, the same cannot be said
of biochemical reactions, as the architecture active site of enzymes
have evolved to ensure the formation of only one product.

<u>Exercise 14.9</u>: Predict the *major* organic product(s) of the
following reactions. If the reaction is expected to result in a mixture
of elimination and substitution product, show both.

a\) bromocyclopentane plus ethoxide

b\) 1-chlorohexane plus CH<sub>3</sub>S<sup>-</sup>

c\) 2-iodo-2-methylpentane plus hydroxide

<u>14.2F: Biochemical E1 elimination reactions</u>

Looking through metabolic pathways in a biochemistry textbook, you'll
see that almost all elimination reactions appear to be of the E1cb type,
occurring on carbons in the  position relative to a carbonyl or
imine. A relatively small number of elimination steps, however, take
place away from the electron-withdrawing influence of a carbonyl or
imine, and these are of the carbocation-intermediate, E1 type. The E2
mechanism is veyr rare in biochemical pathways.

A reaction in the histidine biosynthetic pathway (EC 4.2.1.19) provides
an example of a biological E1 dehydration step:

<img src="media/image458.emf" style="width:6in;height:3.25259in" />

fig 21a

Notice that an E1cb mechanism is not possible here - there is no
adjacent carbonyl or imine and thus no possibility for a stabilized
anionic intermediate. Instead, the first step is loss of water to form a
resonance-stabilized carbo*cation* intermediate. Deprotonation completes
the E1 phase of the reaction to form an enol, which rapidly tautomerizes
to a ketone.

Another example of a biological E1 reaction is found in the biosynthesis
pathway for aromatic amino acids (EC 2.5.1.19):

<img src="media/image459.emf"
style="width:4.43542in;height:1.24097in" />

fig 22

<u>Exercise 14.10</u>: Draw a complete mechanism for the reaction above.
Show how the carbocation intermediate is stabilized by resonance.

<u>Exercise 14.11</u> : Another step (EC 4.2.3.5) in the aromatic acid
biosynthesis pathway could be referred to as a *conjugated* E1
elimination of phosphate, the mechanistic reverse of electrophilic
addition to a conjugated diene (section 14.1E). Draw a complete
mechanism for this reaction, showing two resonance contributors of the
carbocation intermediate.

<img src="media/image460.emf"
style="width:4.22222in;height:1.47222in" />

fig 2

In section 13.3, we saw some Claisen condensation reactions in which the
usual proton-abstracton step was replaced by decarboxylation. A similar
thing can happen with E1 eliminations:

<img src="media/image461.emf"
style="width:4.71319in;height:1.22222in" />

fig 24

Isopentenyl diphosphate, the 'building block' for all isoprenoid
compounds, is a product of this type of hybrid decarboxylation /
elimination reaction (EC 4.1.1.33).

<img src="media/image462.emf"
style="width:5.72222in;height:1.47222in" />

fig 25

<u>Exercise 14.12</u>: A *conjugated* decarboxylation/E1 elimination
reaction (EC 4.2.1.51) occurs in the phenylalanine biosynthesis pathway.

<img src="media/image463.emf"
style="width:2.69444in;height:0.97222in" />

fig 26

a\) Predict the product, and draw a mechanism.

b\) What two main factors contribute to the 'driving force' for this
reaction?

**Section 14.3: Electrophilic alkene isomeration**

Electrophilic reactions in biochemistry are not limited to *addition* to
alkene double bonds. The position of a double bond in an alkene can also
be shifted through an electrophilic, carbocation-intermediate reaction.
An electrophilic alkene *isomerization* occurs when an initial π bond
protonation event (step 1 below) is followed by deprotonation of an
adjacent carbon to re-form the π bond in a different location.

Electrophilic isomerization mechanism:

<img src="media/image464.emf"
style="width:5.74097in;height:1.07431in" />

fig 27

In a key early step in the biosynthesis of isoprenoid compounds,
isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP), the isoprenoid 'building block' molecule,
is isomerized to dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) (EC 5.3.3.2).

<img src="media/image465.emf"
style="width:5.47222in;height:2.05556in" />

fig 28

In the first step, the π bond between carbon \#3 and carbon \#4 is
protonated by a cysteine residue in the active site. X-ray
crystallography studies on the isomerase enzyme (*EMBO J*. **2001**,
*20*, 1530) show that the carbocation intermediate is bound in a very
deep, hydrophobic active site cavity that seals out any water molecules
that could potentially attack the carbocation to form an undesired
alcohol product. Instead, a basic glutamate residue is positioned in the
active site to abstract a proton from carbon \#2 (step 2), serving to
reestablish the double bond in a new position between carbons \#2 and
\#3.

**Section 14.4: Electrophilic substitution**

We have already been introduced to electrophilic addition and
electrophilic isomerization - now, let's move to the third variation on
the electrophilic theme, that of electrophilic substitution. In an
electrophilic substitution reaction, a pair of π-bonded electrons first
attacks an electrophile - usually a carbocation species - and a proton
is then abstracted from an adjacent carbon to reestablish the double
bond, either in the original position or with isomerization.

Electrophilic substitution mechanism:

<img src="media/image466.emf"
style="width:5.68542in;height:3.61111in" />

fig 29

<u>14.4A: Electrophilic substitution reactions in isoprenoid
biosynthesis</u>

Electrophilic substitution steps are very important in the biosynthetic
pathways if isoprenoid compounds. In an early, chain-elongating reaction
(EC 2.5.1.1) of the pathways of many isoprenoids, building blocks IPP
and DMAPP combine to form a 10-carbon isoprenoid product called geranyl
diphosphate (GPP):

<img src="media/image467.emf" style="width:5.52778in;height:1in" />

fig 30

In a preliminary step (step a below), the diphosphate group on DMAPP
departs to form an allylic carbocation.

<img src="media/image468.emf"
style="width:4.80556in;height:3.77778in" />

fig 32

In step 1, the π electrons in IPP then attack the electrophilic
carbocation from step a, resulting in a new carbon-carbon bond and a
tertiary carbocation intermediate. Proton abstraction (step 2) leads to
re-establishment of a double bond one carbon over from where it started
out in IPP.

<u>Exercise 14.13</u>: DMAPP is much more prone to spontaneous
hydrolysis than IPP when they are dissolved in water. Explain why.

<u>Exercise 14.14</u>: Farnesyl diphosphate (FPP) is synthesized by
adding another five-carbon building block to geranyl diphosphate. What
is this building block - IPP or DMAPP? Draw a mechanism for the
formation of FPP.

<img src="media/image469.emf" style="width:2.76875in;height:0.75in" />

fig 33a

<u>Exercise 14.15</u>: Propose a likely mechanism for the following
transformation, which is the first stage in a somewhat complex reaction
in the synthesis of an isoprenoid compound in plants. (*Science*
**1997**, *277*, 1815)

<img src="media/image470.emf" style="width:3.99097in;height:1.25in" />

fig 33

<u>Exercise 14.16</u>: The electrophilic carbon in an electrophilic
substitution reaction is often a carbocation, but it can also be the
methyl group on S-adenosylmethionine (SAM - see section 8.8A). Propose a
likely mechanism for this methylation reaction. (*Biochemistry*
**2012**, *51*, 3003)

<img src="media/image471.emf"
style="width:5.26875in;height:1.05556in" />

<u>14.4B: Electrophilic aromatic substitution</u>

Until now, we have been focusing mostly on electrophilic reactions of
alkenes. Recall from section 2.2C that π bonds in aromatic rings are
substantially less reactive than those in alkenes. Aromatic systems,
however, do in fact undergo electrophilic substitution reactions given a
powerful electrophile such as a carbocation, and if the carbocation
intermediate that forms can be sufficiently stabilized.

Electrophilic aromatic substitution (Friedel-Crafts alkylation)
mechanism

<img src="media/image472.emf" style="width:5.25in;height:1.18542in" />

fig 34

Organic chemists often refer to electrophilic aromatic substitution
reactions with carbocation electrophiles as **Friedel-Crafts
alkylation** reactions.

<u>Exercise 14.17</u>: Aromatic rings generally do not undergo
electrophilic *addition* reactions. Why not?

The Friedel-Crafts reaction below is part of the biosynthesis of vitamin
K and related biomolecules.

<img src="media/image473.emf"
style="width:5.51875in;height:3.76875in" />

fig 36

Loss of diphosphate creates a powerful carbocation electrophile (step a)
which attracts the π electrons of the aromatic ring to form a
carbocation intermediate with a new carbon-carbon bond (step 1).
Substitution is completed by proton abstraction (step 2) which
re-establishes the aromatic sextet.

An important point must be made here: because aromatic π bonds are
substantially less reactive than alkene π bonds, the electrophilic must
be VERY electrophilic - usually a carbocation. In addition, the
carbocation intermediate that results from attack by aromatic π
electrons is generally stabilized by resonance with lone pair electrons
on a nearby oxygen or nitrogen (look at the resonance forms of the
positively-charged intermediate that forms as the result of step 1 in
the above figure).

*Remember that stabilizing the intermediate formed in a rate-limiting
step has the effect of lowering the activation energy for the step, and
thus accelerating the reaction.*

Organic chemists use the term **ring activation** to refer to the
rate-accelerating effect of electron-donating heteroatoms in
electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions. Aromatic rings lacking
any activating oxygen or nitrogen atoms are less reactive towards
electrophilic substitution.

An example of the ring-activating effect of the nitrogen atom on an
aromatic ring can be found in the following Friedel-Crafts reaction (EC
2.5.1.34), which should be familiar from the introduction to this
chapter:

<img src="media/image474.emf"
style="width:5.15764in;height:1.66667in" />

fig 37

Recall that this is a key early step in the biosynthetic pathway for the
ergot alkaloids which are hypothesized to have been the root cause of
the 'bewitchment' of several young girls in 17th century Salem,
Massachusetts. (*J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **1992***,114,* 7354).

<u>Exercise 14.18</u>: Draw a likely mechanism for the biosynthesis of
dimethylallyl tryptophan, including a resonance structure showing how
the carbocation intermediate in the rate determining step is stabilized
by lone pair electrons on the ring nitrogen (in other words, show how
the nitrogen serves to *activate* the ring).

Friedel-Crafts reactions, in addition to being important biochemical
transformations, are commonly carried out in the laboratory. It is
instructive to consider a few examples to see how the same principles of
structure and reactivity apply to both biochemical and laboratory
reactions.

Below is an example of a laboratory Friedel-Crafts alkylation reaction:

<img src="media/image475.emf"
style="width:3.85208in;height:0.79653in" />

fig 37a

Recall that a powerful electrophile - such as a carbocation - is
required for an electrophilic aromatic substitution to occur. The
2-chloropropane reactant is electrophilic, but not electrophilic enough
to react with benzene. Here's where the aluminum trichloride catalyst
comes in: it reacts as a Lewis acid with the alkyl chloride to generate
a secondary carbocation:

<img src="media/image476.emf"
style="width:3.68542in;height:0.72222in" />

fig 37b

The carbocation thus generated is sufficiently electrophilic to react
with the aromatic π electrons, in a manner that should be familiar from
the biochemical examples discussed above:

<img src="media/image477.emf"
style="width:5.22222in;height:1.55556in" />

fig 37c

You may have noticed, however, that one element from the biochemical
Friedel-Crafts reactions is missing here: there is no activating group
to stabilize the ring carbocation intermediate. Indeed, the presence of
an activating group - for example, the oxygen atom of a methoxy
substituent - greatly increases the rate of a Friedel-Crafts alkylation.

<img src="media/image478.emf"
style="width:5.68542in;height:1.87986in" />

fig 37d

Note in the example shown above that two products are formed: one is an
*ortho*-disubstituted benzene and one is *para*-disubstituted. Note also
that no *meta*-disubstituted product is formed. This phenomenon is
referred to as the ***ortho*-*para* directing effect**, and you are led
towards an explanation in the exercise below.

<u>Exercise 14.19</u>:

a\) Draw the lowest-energy resonance contributors of the carbocation
intermediates leading to formation of the *ortho* and *para* products in
the reaction above. Use resonance structures to illustrate how the
methoxy substituent is a ring-activating group.

b\) Draw the *hypothetical* carbocation intermediate in a reaction
leading to formation of a *meta*-disubstituted product. Is this
carbocation stabilized by the methoxy oxygen? Can you see why no *meta*
product forms?

<u>Exercise 14.20</u>:

a\) Just as there are ring-activating groups in electrophilic aromatic
substitutions, there are also ring-***de***activating groups. For each
of the substituted benzene reactants below, draw the carbocation
intermediate leading to the *ortho* substitution product and decide
whether the substituent is ring-activating or ring-deactivating in a
Friedel-Crafts reaction with 2-chloropropane and AlCl<sub>3</sub> (in
other words, which compounds would react *faster* than benzene, and
which would react *slower*?) Explain how the ring-deactivating effect
works.

<img src="media/image479.emf"
style="width:4.36111in;height:1.21319in" />

b\) (*challenging*!) Ring-deactivating substituents are usually also
*meta*-directing. Use one of your carbocation intermediate drawings from
part (a) of this exercise, and the concept od resonance, to explain this
observation.

c\) (*answer part (b) first*) Look again at the vitamin K biosynthesis
reaction, and discuss the ring activating/directing effects of the two
substituents on the substrate.

**Section 14.5: Carbocation rearrangements**

Earlier in this chapter we introduced the so-called 'Markovnikov rule',
which can be used to predict the favored regiochemical outcome of
electrophilic additions to asymmetric alkenes. According to what we have
learned, addition of HBr to 3-methyl-1-butene should result in a
secondary bromoalkane. However, the predominant product that is actually
be observed in this reaction is a *tertiary* alkyl bromide! Little or no
secondary alkyl bromide forms.

<img src="media/image480.emf"
style="width:3.07431in;height:2.10208in" />

fig 38

To explain this result, let's take a look at the mechanism for the
reaction:

Electrophilic addition with a hydride shift:

<img src="media/image481.emf"
style="width:5.26875in;height:3.91667in" />

fig 39

Protonation of the double bond results in a secondary carbocation (step
1). What happens next (step 2 above) is a process called a **carbocation
rearrangement,** and more specifically, a **hydride shift.** The
electrons in the bond between carbon \#3 and a hydrogen are attracted by
the positive charge on carbon \#2, and they simply shift over to fill
the empty *p* orbital, pulling the proton over with them. Notice that
the hydride, in shifting, is *not* acting as an actual leaving group - a
hydride ion is a very strong base and a very poor leaving group.

An important reminder: a hydride ion (H<sup>-</sup>) is a proton *plus
two electrons*. Be sure not to confuse a hydride ion with H<sup>+</sup>,
which is *just* a proton without any electrons.

As the shift proceeds, a new C-H σ bond is formed at carbon \#2, and
carbon \#3 is left with an empty *p* orbital and a positive charge.

<img src="media/image482.emf"
style="width:4.94444in;height:1.99097in" />

fig 40

What is the thermodynamic driving force for this process? Notice that
the hydride shift results in the conversion of a secondary carbocation
to a (more stable) tertiary carbocation - a thermodynamically *downhill*
step. As it turns out, the shift occurs so quickly that it is
accomplished before the bromide nucleophile has time to attack at carbon
\#2. Rather, the bromide will attack (step 3) at carbon \#3 to complete
the addition.

Consider another example. When HBr is added to 3,3-dimethyl-1-butene,
the product is a tertiary - rather than a secondary - alkyl bromide.

<img src="media/image483.emf"
style="width:2.87986in;height:2.10208in" />

fig 41

Notice that in the observed product, *the carbon framework has been
rearranged*: the methyl carbon indicated by a red dot has shifted from
carbon \#3 to carbon \#2. This is an example of another type of
carbocation rearrangement, called a **methyl shift**.

Below is the mechanism for the reaction. Once again a secondary
carbocation intermediate is formed in step 1. In this case, there is no
hydrogen on carbon \#3 available to shift over create a more stable
tertiary carbocation. Instead, it is a methyl group that does the
shifting, as the electrons in the carbon-carbon σ bond move over to fill
the empty orbital on carbon \#2 (step 2 below).

Electrophilic addition with methyl shift:

<img src="media/image484.emf"
style="width:5.43542in;height:4.02778in" />

fig 42

The methyl shift results in the conversion of a secondary carbocation to
a more stable tertiary carbocation. The end result is a rearrangement of
the carbon framework of the molecule.

<u>Exercise 14.21:</u> Which of the following carbocations are likely to
undergo a shift? If a shift is likely, draw the new carbocation that
would result.

<img src="media/image485.emf"
style="width:3.93542in;height:0.72222in" />

<img src="media/image486.emf"
style="width:4.22222in;height:0.96319in" />

<u>Exercise 14.22</u>: In the (non-biochemcial) reactions below, the
major product forms as the result of a hydride or methyl shift from a
carbocation intermediate. Predict the structure of the major product for
each reaction, disregarding stereochemistry.

a\)

<img src="media/image487.emf"
style="width:2.13889in;height:0.82431in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image488.emf"
style="width:2.05556in;height:0.47222in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image489.emf" style="width:2.25in;height:0.47222in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image490.emf"
style="width:4.66667in;height:0.54653in" />

fig 43

<u>Exercise 14.23</u>: Draw the most abundant product of this laboratory
Friedel-Crafts reaction:

<img src="media/image491.emf" style="width:2.75in;height:0.66667in" />

fig 43a

Carbocation rearrangements are involved in many known biochemical
reactions. Rearrangements are particularly important in
carbocation-intermediate reactions in which isoprenoid molecules cyclize
to form complex multi-ring structures. For example, one of the key steps
in the biosynthesis of cholesterol is the electrophilic cyclization of
oxidosqualene to form a steroid called lanosterol (E.C. 5.4.99.7).

<img src="media/image492.emf"
style="width:4.91667in;height:1.80556in" />

fig 44

This complex but fascinating reaction has two phases. The first phase is
where the actual cyclization takes place, with the formation of four new
carbon-carbon bonds and a carbocation intermediate. This phase is a
'cascade' of electrophilic alkene addition steps, beginning with
addition of an electrophilic functional group called an 'epoxide'.

The epoxide functional group - composed of a three membered ring with
two carbons and an oxygen - is relatively rare in biomolecules and
biochemical reactions, and for this reason it is not discussed in detail
in this book. However, epoxides are an important and versatile
intermediate in laboratory organic synthesis, so you will learn much
more about how they are made and how they react if you take a course in
chemical synthesis. For now, it is sufficient to recognize that the
carbon atoms of an epoxide are potent electrophiles, due to both the
carbon-oxygen bond dipoles and the inherent strain of the three membered
ring.

The second phase involves a series of hydride and methyl shifts
culminating in a deprotonation. In the exercise below, you will have the
opportunity to work through the entire cyclase reaction mechanism. In
section 15.7, we will take a look at how the epoxide group of
oxidosqualene is formed. *Trends Pharm. Sci*. **2005**, *26*, 335; *J.
Phys Chem B*., **2012**, *116*, 13857.

<u>Exercise 14.24</u>:

a\) The figure below outlines the first, cyclizing phase of the reaction
that converts oxidosqualene to lanosterol. However, the diagram is
missing electron movement arrows, and intermediates 1-4 are all missing
formal charges - fill these in.

<u>First phase</u> (ring formation):

<img src="media/image493.emf"
style="width:5.82431in;height:4.37986in" />

(fig 20)

fig 45

b\) Next comes the 'shifting' phase of the reaction. Once again, supply
the missing mechanistic arrows.

<u>Second phase</u>: rearrangement and deprotonation

<img src="media/image494.emf" style="width:6in;height:4.17696in" />

fig 46

c\) Look at the first and last steps of the entire process: overall,
would you describe this as an electrophilic addition or substitution?

The oxidosqualene cyclization reaction and others like it are truly
remarkable examples of the exquisite control exerted by enzymes over the
course of a chemical reaction. Consider: an open-chain starting molecule
is converted, by a single enzyme, into a complex multiple fused-ring
structure with *seven* chiral centers. Oxidosqualene could potentially
cyclize in many different ways, resulting in a great variety of
different products. In order for the enzyme to catalyze the formation of
a *single* product with the correct connectivity and stereochemistry,
the enzyme must be able to maintain precise control of the conformation
of the starting compound and all reactive intermediates in the active
site, while also excluding water molecules which could attack at any of
the positively charged carbons.

**Key learning objectives for this chapter**

Understand why the π bond in a carbon-carbon double bond is more
reactive than the σ bond.

**Addition**

Be able to draw a mechanism for the electrophilic addition of a haloacid
to an alkene.

> <u>Stereochemistry</u>: understand why nonenzymatic electrophilic
> addition of a haloacid to an alkene occurs with racemization (both
> inversion and retention of configuration) at both alkene carbons. Be
> able to distinguish *syn* vs *anti* addition.
>
> <u>Regiochemistry</u>: Be able to predict the regiochemical outcome of
> an electrophilic addition, based on the relative stability of the two
> possible carbocation intermediates. Be able to predict when
> anti-Markovnikov addition is likely to occur.

Be able to predict the product of nonenzymatic addition of water/alcohol
to an alkene, including regio- and stereo-chemistry when applicable. Be
able to draw complete mechanisms.

Be able to predict the products of nonenzymatic addition of
water/alcohol to a conjugated diene or triene, including regio- and
stereochemistry when applicable. Be able to draw complete mechanisms,
including multiple resonance forms for carbocation intermediates.

Be able to apply your understanding of nonenzymatic alkene addition
reactions to draw mechanisms for enzymatic addition reactions. In
particular, you should be able to draw mechanisms for biochemical
electrophilic addition reactions in which a new carbon-carbon bond is
formed.

**Elimination**

Be able to draw a mechanism for an E1 elimination reaction.

Be able to predict possible E1 reaction products from a common starting
compound , taking into account both regiochemistry (Zaitsev's rule) and
stereochemistry.

Be able to recognize and draw a mechanism for biochemical E1 reactions
in which

a\) the second step is a deprotonation event

b\) the second step is a decarboxylation event

Be able to distinguish whether a biochemical elimination reaction is
likely to proceed through a E1cb or E1 mechanism, based on the structure
of the starting compound.

**Isomerization/substitution**

Be able to recognize and draw mechanisms for a biochemical electrophilic
isomerization reaction (shifting the location of the carbon-carbon
double bond).

Be able to recognize and draw mechanisms for a biochemical electrophilic
substitution reaction.

Be able to recognize and draw mechanisms for a biochemical electrophilic
*aromatic* substitution reaction, and be able to explain the
ring-activating effect (how the carbocation intermediate is stabilized
by resonance, usually with lone-pair electrons on either an oxygen or a
nitrogen atom).

Be able to recognize when a hydride or alkyl shift is likely to occur
with a carbocation reaction intermediate.

Be able to draw a mechanism for a reaction that includes a carbocation
rearrangement.

**Problems**

**P14.1**: Draw the major product(s) (including all stereoisomers) that
would be expected to result from the nonenzymatic electrophilic addition
reactions below. Your product(s) should result from the most stable
possible carbocation intermediate. Hint: consider the possibility of
thermodynamically favorable rearrangement steps.

a\)

<img src="media/image495.emf" style="width:2.25in;height:0.24097in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image496.emf"
style="width:2.44444in;height:0.71319in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image497.emf"
style="width:2.69444in;height:0.77778in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image498.emf" style="width:2.82431in;height:0.75in" />

e\)

<img src="media/image499.emf"
style="width:2.77778in;height:0.60208in" />

**P14.2**: Draw likely mechanisms for the nonenzymatic reactions below.
Products shown are not necessarily the most abundant for the reaction.

a\)

<img src="media/image500.emf" style="width:3.46319in;height:0.5in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image501.emf" style="width:3.55556in;height:0.5in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image502.emf"
style="width:3.16667in;height:0.82431in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image503.emf"
style="width:2.65764in;height:0.76875in" />

**P14.3:** Provide mechanisms for the following reactions, both of which
are part of an alkaloid synthesis pathway in fungi. (*Microbiol*.
**2005**, *151*, 2199)

<img src="media/image504.emf"
style="width:4.90764in;height:2.99097in" />

**P14.4**: Draw a likely mechanism for the reaction below. The product
is myrcene, a compound produced by fir trees as a defense against
insects. (*J. Biol. Chem* **1997**, *272*, 21784)

<img src="media/image505.emf"
style="width:2.43333in;height:1.15556in" />

**P14.5:** Provide a mechanism for the following reaction from the
vitamin B<sub>12</sub> biosynthetic pathway, and identify the missing
participants indicated by questions marks in the figure.

<img src="media/image506.emf"
style="width:4.82431in;height:1.01875in" />

**P14.6:** A diene molecule synthesized in the laboratory was found to
irreversibly inhibit the action of isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase
(section 14.3) when the carbon indicated with a dot becomes covalently
bonded to a cysteine residue in the enzyme's active site. Propose a
mechanism showing how this could happen. ( *J. Am. Chem. Soc*. **2005**,
*127*, 17433)

<img src="media/image507.emf"
style="width:1.12986in;height:0.94444in" />

**P14.7:** Nonenzymatic electrophilic addition of water to alkynes
results in the formation of a ketone or an aldehyde, depending on the
starting alkyne. A vinylic carbocation is a key intermediate, and the
reaction is accelerated with the use of a catalytic amount of strong
acid. Predict the product the addition of water to propyne, and draw a
mechanism for the reaction.

**P14.8**: The reaction below is part the pathway by which some bacteria
-including the species which cause tuberculosis and leprosy - form
distinctive branched-chain fatty acids for incorporation into their cell
walls. This enzyme is of interest to scientists as possible targets for
new antibiotic drugs. Propose a likely mechanism, and identify the
missing participants denoted by questions marks. (*J. Biol. Chem*.
**2006**, *281*, 4434)

<img src="media/image508.emf"
style="width:4.46319in;height:0.85208in" />

**P14.9:** Suggest a likely mechanism for this reaction, which is a key
step in the synthesis of bacterial cell walls. Your mechanism should
show an electrophilic addition, followed by an E1 elimination.

<img src="media/image509.emf"
style="width:5.83333in;height:1.33333in" />

**P14.10:** Suggest a mechanism for the following reaction, which is
part of the pathway by which many microbes synthesize methanopterin, a
derivative of the vitamin folic acid. *Hint*: the mechanism can be
described as an electrophilic aromatic substitution with a final
decarboxylation step in place of the usual deprotonation step. (*J.
Biol. Chem*. **2004**, *279*, 39389.

<img src="media/image510.emf"
style="width:5.83333in;height:1.04653in" />

(

**P14.11:** Researchers investigated the mechanism of the enzyme
3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonate-8-phosphate synthase by running the
reaction with one of the substrates labeled with the <sup>18</sup>O
isotope (colored red in the scheme below). Consider the two hypothetical
results shown below, each pointing to a different mechanism. Both
mechanisms involve a carbocation intermediate. (*Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun*. **1988**, *157*, 816)

<img src="media/image511.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.28054in" />

a\) Propose a mechanism that is consistent with result A, in which the
<sup>18</sup>O label ends up in the ketone group of the organic product.

b\) Propose a mechanism that is consistent with result B, in which the
<sup>18</sup>O label ends up in the inorganic phosphate by-product.

**P14.12**: Consider the following isomerization reaction (*J. Biol.
Chem*. **1989**, *264*, 2075):

<img src="media/image512.emf"
style="width:4.29653in;height:0.74097in" />

(JBC264, 2075)

a\) Suggest a likely mechanism involving a carbocation intermediate.

b\) Suggest an isotopic labeling experiment (using substrate labeled
with <sup>18</sup>O) that could confirm or rule out a alternative,
*concerted* isomerization mechanism (*ie*. one without formation of a
carbocation intermediate). Explain your reasoning.

c\) Propose a mechanism for the following reaction (notice that the
starting compound is linalyl diphosphate from part (a), drawn in a
different conformation). (*Arch Biochem Biophys* **2003**, *417*, 203)

<img src="media/image513.emf"
style="width:4.13889in;height:1.51875in" />

(

For parts d-f, refer to the figure below:

<img src="media/image514.emf"
style="width:4.54653in;height:3.16667in" />

d\) Provide mechanisms for the conversion of linalyl diphosphate to
(+)-bornyl diphosphate

e\) Provide mechanisms for the conversion of linalyl diphosphate to
(+)-sabinene.

f\) Is the second step in the (+)-bornyl diphosphate pathway (addition
of phosphate) a Markovnikov or anti-Markovnikov addition? Explain the
regiochemistry of this step in terms of carbocation stability.

**P14.13:** The two compounds shown below were each treated with HBr,
and the products isolated and analyzed by <sup>1</sup>H NMR. Use the NMR
data provided to determine the structure of both products, then explain
the observed regiochemistry of the addition reaction.

<img src="media/image515.emf"
style="width:2.80556in;height:0.94444in" />

<sup>1</sup>H-NMR data for product of HBr addition to methyl vinyl
ketone:

<u>δ integration splitting</u>

2.2 1.5 s

3.0 1 t

3.5 1 t

<sup>1</sup>H-NMR data for product of HBr addition to methyl
methacrylate:

<u>δ integration splitting</u>

1.3 3 d

2.3 1 sextet

3.5 2 d

3.7 3 s

**P14.14:** Ketones and aldehydes with a hydroxy group in the  position
are known to undergo an isomerization reaction known as an **acyloin
rearrangement**:

<img src="media/image516.emf"
style="width:4.74097in;height:1.36111in" />

Notice in the general acyloin rearragnement mechanism below, the green
alkyl group is *shifting* from the  carbon (red) to the carbonyl carbon
(blue). Notice also that this shift does not involve a carbocation
intermediate, although a resonance contributor can be drawn in which the
carbonyl carbon has a positive charge.

a\) Draw a mechanism for this acyloin rearrangement step in the
biosynthetic pathway for the amino acid leucine:

<img src="media/image517.emf"
style="width:3.32431in;height:0.80556in" />

b\) Draw a mechanism for this acyloin rearrangement step in the
isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway in bacteria:

<img src="media/image518.emf" style="width:3.5in;height:0.79653in" />

**  
**

**P14.15:** Propose mechanisms for these reactions in the vitamin
B<sub>12</sub> biosynthetic pathway:

a\)

<img src="media/image519.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.43772in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image520.emf"
style="width:3.22222in;height:1.07431in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image521.emf"
style="width:5.07431in;height:1.11111in" />

)

**P14.16:** An early reaction in the biosynthesis of tryptophan can be
described as an intramolecular electrophilic aromatic
substitution/decarboxylation hybrid, followed by an E1 dehydration (EC
4.1.1.48).

<img src="media/image522.emf"
style="width:4.72222in;height:1.21319in" />

a\) Draw a mechanism that corresponds to the verbal description given
above. Use resonance structures to show how the nitrogen atom helps to
stabilize the carbocation intermediate. *Hint*: the electrophilic carbon
in this case is a ketone rather than a carbocation.

b\) What aspect of this reaction do you think helps to compensate for
the energetic disadvantage of not having a powerful carbocation
electrophile?

c\) Again thinking in terms of energetics, what is the 'driving force'
for the dehydration step?

**P14.17:** Propose a likely carbocation-intermediate mechanism for the
following reaction in the biosynthesis of morphine, being sure to
identify the structure of the organic compound released in the
reaction.(

<img src="media/image523.emf"
style="width:4.90764in;height:1.72222in" />

**P14.18:** Propose mechanisms for these three electrophilic cyclization
reactions. Carbocation rearrangement steps are involved.

a\) epi-arisolochene

b\) vetispiradiene (*Science* **1997**, *277*, 1815)

<img src="media/image524.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.8005in" />

c\) pentalenene (*Science* **1997**, *277*, 1820)

<img src="media/image525.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.18943in" />

**P14.19**: Strictosinide, an intermediate in the biosynthesis of the
deadly poison strychnine, is formed from two steps: a) intermolecular
imine formation, and b) an intramolecular, ring-forming electrophilic
aromatic substitution with the imine carbon from step (a) as the
electrophile.

<img src="media/image526.emf"
style="width:2.49097in;height:1.80556in" />

Given this information, predict the two precursors to strictosinide, and
draw a mechanism for the reaction described. Hint: use the 'retro'
skills you developed in chapters 12 and 13.

**P14.20**: In the introduction to chapter 8, we learned about reactions
in which the cytosine and adenine bases in DNA are methylated. In the
course of that chapter, we learned how adenine N-methylation occurs in
bacteria, but we were not yet equipped to understand cytosine
C-methylation, which was the more relevant reaction in terms of human
health and development. Now we are: propose a reasonable mechanism for
the C-methylation of cytosine.

**P14.21**: The reaction below has been proposed to proceed via a
cyclization step followed by an E1/decarboxylation step (in other words,
an E1 mechanism where decarboxylation occurs instead of deprotonation).
Draw a mechanism that fits this description, and show the most stable
resonance contributors of the two key cationic intermediates.

<img src="media/image527.emf"
style="width:5.83333in;height:1.30556in" />

**P14.22:** The conversion of chorismate to phenylpyruvate is a key
transformation in the biosynthesis of phenylalanine. The first step is a
concerted electrophilic rearrangement to form prephenate (this step
involves a six-membered transition state). Deduce the structure of
prephenate, and provide a complete mechanism for the transformation.

<img src="media/image528.emf" style="width:5.03333in;height:1.6in" />

(

**P14.23:** Suggest likely a mechanism for the following reaction:

<img src="media/image529.emf"
style="width:3.56667in;height:2.67778in" />

(J. Org. Chem. 2003, 68, 5433)

**Chapter 15**

**Oxidation and reduction reactions**

<img src="media/image530.jpeg" style="width:6in;height:3.99931in" />

photo credit: Johann Schwarz
(https://www.flickr.com/photos/blacksportsphotos/)

**Introduction**

Theo Ross was not doing very well at his summer job, and he was
frustrated. His boss had given him specific instructions, and yet Theo
kept botching the job, over and over again. Theo was not used to failure
– he had achieved almost perfect scores on both the ACT and SAT college
entrance exams, and was headed to Stanford University in the fall. Why
couldn't he get it right? It wasn't brain surgery, after all.

Well, actually – it *was* brain surgery.

An [April 17, 2014 article in *Sports
Illustrated*](http://mmqb.si.com/2014/04/17/mouse-concussions-nfl-cte)
tells Theo's story. Wanting to do something interesting over the summer
of 2010 before he started college, Theo had applied for a research
internship at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland.
This was an extremely competitive program normally reserved for
outstanding college students, but somehow Theo had managed to win a
coveted spot in the program, working with Dr. Dorian McGavern, a
neurologist studying how meningitis effects the brain. Dr. McGavern
assigned Theo the task of performing 'skull-thinning' surgery on mice,
part of which involved using a special saw to shave down a small section
of the bone in order to gain access to the brain. It was a delicate
procedure, something that even some experienced neurosurgeons who had
tried it had found challenging. Any small slip resulted in a concussion
to the mouse's brain, rendering it useless for the study. Theo just
couldn't get the hang of it, and ended up concussing one mouse after
another.

You have probably heard the old expression: “when life gives you lemons,
make lemonade”. Theo made a lot of lemonade that summer.

Theo and Dr. McGavern eventually realized that his failure at the
procedure actually presented an opportunity to observe what happens to a
brain right after a concussive injury. Theo started doing more
skull-thinning surgeries, but now the goal was to *cause* concussion,
rather than to avoid it. The concussed mice (who had been anaesthetized
prior to the surgery) were immediately strapped under a microscope so
that Theo could observe how their brains responded to the injury. This
was new, and very exciting stuff: most of what neurologists knew about
concussions up to that point had come from MRI (magnetic resonance
imaging – see chapter 5) or autopsies. Nobody knew very much about what
happens at the cellular level in a brain in the minutes and hours after
a concussion has occurred. In addition, the problem of traumatic head
injuries and the long-lasting effects they cause was becoming an
increasingly hot topic in the news, critically relevant to thousands of
veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan as well as to football
players and other athletes in contact sports– including Theo, who had
been a competitive wrestler in high school. (You might have been
wondering why Theo's story appeared in *Sports Illustrated* – now you
know.)

Theo spent the rest of that summer, and every spring break and summer
vacation over the next few years, working in McGavern's lab on the new
project. He and McGavern found evidence that the 'hidden' damage to a
concussed brain – that which went undetected in MRI scans but could come
back to haunt the victim years later in the form of recurring headaches,
memory loss, and depression – may be caused by a type of molecule
referred to as 'reactive oxygen species', or ROS, leaking from damaged
tissues into the brain. ROS are potentially harmful byproducts of
respiration such as hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) that
are constantly being produced in our cells. Although ROS can cause
serious oxidative damage if they are allowed to build up, our bodies
have evolved ways to deal with them, using so-called 'ROS scavengers' to
convert them to something innocuous like water.

With this new understanding, Theo and his mentor had another idea: what
if they could prevent the ROS from causing further damage to a recently
concussed brain by applying an scavenger to the injury? After some trial
and error, they found that an ROS scavenger compound called glutathione,
when applied directly to the skull of a concussed mouse within a few
minutes to three hours after the injury, could permeate the bone and
react with the ROS. Brain cells from these glutathione-treated mice
appeared normal, with none of the signs of ROS damage Theo was used to
seeing.

<img src="media/image531.emf"
style="width:2.63889in;height:1.47222in" />

fig 1a

The road from an initial scientific discovery to a safe and effective
medical treatment is often a very long one, but Theo Roth and Dorian
McGavern appear to have made a discovery that could eventually help
prevent some of the most devastating and long-term damage caused by
traumatic head injuries. In the end, it's a very good thing that Theo's
hands were not cut out for brain surgery.

\*\*\*

The chemistry of oxidation and reduction - often called 'redox'
chemistry - is central to Theo Roth's discovery about what happens to a
concussed brain at the molecular level. This chapter is dedicated to
redox chemistry. We'll begin with a reminder of what you learned in
General Chemistry about the fundamentals of redox reactions in the
context of inorganic elements such as iron, copper and zinc: reduction
is a gain of electrons, and oxidation is a loss of electrons. Then,
we'll expand our understanding to include bioorganic redox reactivity,
examining among other things how alcohols are converted to ketones and
aldehydes, aldehydes are converted to carboxylic acids, and amines are
converted to imines. We will also talk about redox reactions in the
broader context of metabolism in living things.

A central player in some of the biochemical redox reactions we will see
is the coenzyme called glutathione, Theo Roth's 'magic bullet' molecule
that was able to rescue mouse brain cells from death by oxidation. We'll
see how glutathione acts as a mediator in the formation and cleavage of
disulfide bonds in proteins, and how it acts as an 'ROS scavenger' to
turn hydrogen peroxide into water.

**  
**

**Section 15.1: Oxidation and reduction of organic compounds - an
overview**

You are undoubtedly already familiar with the general idea of oxidation
and reduction: you learned in general chemistry that when a compound or
element is oxidized it loses electrons, and when it is reduced it gains
electrons. You also know that oxidation and reduction reactions occur in
tandem: if one species is oxidized, another must be reduced at the same
time - thus the term 'redox reaction'.

Most of the redox reactions you have seen previously in general
chemistry probably involved the flow of electrons from one metal to
another, such as the reaction between copper ion in solution and
metallic zinc:

Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + Zn<sub>(s)</sub> → Cu<sub>(s)</sub> +
Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub>

<u>Exercise 15.1</u>: Reading the reaction above from left to right,
which chemical species is being oxidized? Which is being reduced?

When we talk about the oxidation and reduction of organic compounds,
what we are mainly concerned with is the number of carbon-heteroatom
bonds in the compound compared to the number of carbon-hydrogen bonds.
(Remember that the term 'heteroatom' in organic chemistry generally
refers to oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, or a halogen).

> <u>Oxidation</u> of an organic compound results an *increase* in the
> number of carbon-heteroatom bonds, and/or a *decrease* in the number
> of carbon-hydrogen bonds.
>
> <u>Reduction</u> of an organic compound results in a *decrease* in the
> number of carbon-heteroatom bonds, and/or an *increase* in the number
> of carbon-hydrogen bonds.

Below are a number of common functional group transformations that are
classified as redox.

<img src="media/image532.emf"
style="width:4.91667in;height:3.52778in" />

fig1

Heteroatoms such as oxygen and nitrogen are more electronegative than
carbon, so when a carbon atom gains a bond to a heteroatom, it *loses*
electron density and is thus being oxidized. Conversely, hydrogen is
less electronegative than carbon, so when a carbon gains a bond to a
hydrogen, it is *gaining* electron density, and thus being reduced.

<u>Exercise 15.2</u>: The hydration of an alkene to an alcohol is *not*
classified as a redox reaction. Explain.

For the most part, when talking about redox reactions in organic
chemistry we are dealing with a small set of very recognizable
functional group transformations. The concept of **oxidation state** can
be useful in this context. When a compound has lots of carbon-hydrogen
bonds, it is said to be in a lower oxidation state, or a more reduced
state. Conversely, if it contains a lot of carbon-heteroatom bonds, it
is said to be in a higher oxidation state.

We'll start with a series of single carbon compounds as an example.
Methane, in which the carbon has four bonds to hydrogen, is the most
reduced member of the group. The compounds become increasingly oxidized
as we move from left to right, with each step gaining a bond to oxygen
and losing a bond to hydrogen. Carbon dioxide, in which all four bonds
on the carbon are to oxygen, is in the highest oxidation state.

<img src="media/image533.emf"
style="width:4.63889in;height:1.37986in" />

fig 3

More generally, we can rank the oxidation state of common functional
groups:

<img src="media/image534.emf"
style="width:5.29653in;height:1.43542in" />

fig 4

The alkane oxidation state is the most reduced. Alcohols, thiols,
amines, and alkenes are all at the same oxidation state: therefore, a
reaction converting one of these groups to another - an alcohol to
alkene conversion, for example - is *not* a redox reaction. Aldehydes,
however, are at a higher oxidation state than alcohols, so an alcohol to
aldehyde conversion is an oxidation. Likewise, an imine to amine
conversion is a reduction, but an imine to ketone conversion is not a
redox reaction.

It is important to keep in mind that oxidation and reduction always
occurs in tandem: when one compound is oxidized, another compound must
be reduced. Often, organic chemists will use the terms **oxidizing
agent** and **reducing agent** to refer to species that are commonly
used, by human chemists or by nature, to achieve the oxidation or
reduction of a variety of compounds. For example, chromium trioxide
(CrO<sub>3</sub>) is a laboratory oxidizing agent used by organic
chemists to oxidize a secondary alcohol to a ketone, in the process
being reduced to H<sub>2</sub>CrO<sub>3</sub>. Sodium borohydride
(NaBH<sub>4</sub>) is a laboratory reducing agent used to reduce ketones
(or aldehydes) to alcohols, in the process being oxidized to
NaBH<sub>3</sub>OH.

<img src="media/image535.emf"
style="width:5.71319in;height:2.99097in" />

There is a wide selection of oxidizing and reducing agents available for
use in the organic chemistry laboratory, each with its own particular
properties and uses. For example, while sodium borohydride is very
useful for reducing aldehyde and ketone groups to alcohols, it will not
reduce esters and other carboxylic acid derivatives. If you take a
course in synthetic organic chemistry, you will learn about the use of
many of these agents.

In this book, of course, we are concerned primarily with the organic
chemistry that occurs within a living cell. A large part of this chapter
will be spent looking at the action of two very important classes of
coenzymes - the nicotinamides and the flavins - that serve as
biochemical oxidizing and reducing agents. We also consider the
oxidation and reduction of sulfur atoms in thiol groups, especially the
thiol group on the side chain of cysteine residues in proteins.

<u>Exercise 15.3</u>: Each of the biochemical transformations shown
below is a step in amino acid metabolism. For each, state whether the
substrate is being oxidized, reduced, or neither oxidized nor reduced.

a\) (from aromatic amino acid biosynthesis)

<img src="media/image536.emf"
style="width:3.24097in;height:1.55556in" />

b\) (from the biosynthesis of arginine and proline)

<img src="media/image537.emf"
style="width:4.69444in;height:0.90764in" />

c\) (from the catabolism of lysine)

<img src="media/image538.emf"
style="width:4.46319in;height:0.55556in" />

d\) (from the catabolism of tryptophan)

<img src="media/image539.emf"
style="width:4.29653in;height:0.68542in" />

e\) (from the catabolism of serine)

<img src="media/image540.emf"
style="width:3.30556in;height:1.22222in" />

**Section 15.2: Oxidation and reduction in the context of metabolism**

Think back again to the redox chemistry that you learned in your general
chemistry course. A common experiment in a general chemistry lab is to
set up a galvanic cell consisting of a copper electrode immersed in an
aqueous copper nitrate solution, connected by a wire to a zinc electrode
immersed in an aqueous zinc nitrate solution.

<img src="media/image541.jpg"
style="width:5.60642in;height:2.99074in" />

(http://chemwiki.ucdavis.edu)

When the cell is completed with a salt bridge, an electrical current
begins to flow - what we have is a simple battery (figure a above). Over
time, the copper electrode gets heavier as metallic copper is deposited
on the copper cathode, while the zinc anode slowly dissolves into
solution (figure b above). The redox reaction occurring here is:

Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + Zn<sub>(s)</sub> → Cu<sub>(s)</sub> +
Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + energy

Electrons flow from zinc metal to copper cations, creating zinc cations
and copper metal: in other words, zinc metal is being oxidized to zinc
cation and copper cation is being reduced to copper metal, as expressed
by the two relevant half-cell reactions:

Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
Cu<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub>

Zn<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub> → Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> +
2e<sup>-</sup>

We can predict before we set up the cell that the spontaneous flow of
electrons will go in the zinc to copper direction, just by looking at a
table of **standard reduction potentials** (such a table was no doubt in
your general chemistry text).

**Standard reduction potentials at 25 <sup>o</sup>C**

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>Reduction half-reaction</strong></th>
<th><strong>Reduction potential (volts)</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Ag<sup>+1</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + e<sup>-</sup> →
Ag<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub></td>
<td>0.800</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
Cu<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub></td>
<td>0.337</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>H<sup>+1</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
H<sub>2(g)</sub></td>
<td><p>0</p>
<p><em>(standard)</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Pb<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
Pb<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub></td>
<td>-0.126</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fe<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
Fe<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub></td>
<td>-0.441</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
Zn<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub></td>
<td>-0.763</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Copper ion (Cu<sup>+2</sup>) has a higher standard reduction potential
than zinc ion (Zn<sup>+2</sup>), meaning that, under identical
conditions, more energy is released by reducing one mole of
Cu<sup>+2</sup> ion to Cu<sup>0</sup> metal than is released by reducing
one mole of Zn<sup>+2</sup> ion to Zn<sup>0</sup> metal.<sup>.</sup>
Another way to think about this is to imagine that the copper ion
'wants' to gain electrons more than the zinc ion does*.* Conversely,
zinc metal 'wants' to *lose* electrons more than the copper metal does.
Therefore, transfer of two electrons from zinc metal to Cu<sup>2+</sup>
is a thermodynamically downhill process, whereas the reverse process -
transfer of two electrons from copper metal to Zn<sup>2+</sup> - is
thermodynamically uphill.

Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + Zn<sub>(s)</sub> → Cu<sub>(s)</sub> +
Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + energy

Cu<sub>(s)</sub> + Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + energy →
Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + Zn<sub>(s)</sub>

Let's now extend the idea of redox reactions to the context of
metabolism in living things. When we 'burn' glucose for energy, we
transfer (by a series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions) electrons from
glucose to molecular oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>), oxidizing the six carbon
molecules in glucose to carbon dioxide and at the same time reducing the
oxygen atoms in O<sub>2</sub> to water. The overall chemical equation
is:

<img src="media/image542.emf"
style="width:5.40764in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 8

The transfer of electrons from glucose to O<sub>2</sub> is a
thermodynamically downhill, energy-releasing process, just like the
transfer of electrons from zinc metal to copper ion. And while you could
have used the energy released by the zinc/copper redox reaction to light
a small light bulb, your cells use the energy released by the
glucose/oxygen redox process to carry out a wide variety of
energy-requiring activities, such as walking to your organic chemistry
lecture.

In your general chemistry copper/zinc experiment, was it possible to
reverse the reaction so that it runs in the uphill direction - in other
words, to oxidize copper and reduce zinc?

Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + Cu<sub>(s)</sub> + energy →
Zn<sub>(s)</sub> + Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub>

Just ask yourself the question: is it possible to get water to flow
uphill? Of course it is - but only if you supply a pump and some energy!

The same idea applies to 'pumping' electrons uphill in your copper-zinc
electrochemical cell: all you need to do is to provide some energy in
the form of an external electrical current in order to pump the electron
flow in the uphill direction. You are recharging your battery.

Thinking again in a biochemical context: plants are able, by a process
called photosynthesis, to reduce carbon dioxide and oxidize water to
form glucose and molecular oxygen: essentially recharging the
ecosystem's biochemical battery using energy from the sun.

6CO<sub>2</sub> + 6H<sub>2</sub>O + energy →
C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>12</sub>O<sub>6</sub> + 6O<sub>2</sub>

On a global scale, oxidation of the carbons in glucose to CO<sub>2</sub>
by non-photosynthetic organisms (like people) and the subsequent
reductive synthesis of glucose from CO<sub>2</sub> by plants is what
ecologists refer to as the 'carbon cycle'.

In general the more reduced an organic molecule is, the more energy is
released when it is oxidized to CO<sub>2</sub> . Going back to our
single-carbon examples, we see that methane, the most reduced compound,
releases the most energy when oxidized to carbon dioxide, while formic
acid releases the least:

<img src="media/image543.emf"
style="width:5.93542in;height:3.87986in" />

fig 9

A lipid (fat) molecule, where most of the carbons are in the highly
reduced alkane state, contains more energy per gram than glucose, where
five of the six carbons are in the more oxidized alcohol state (look
again at the glucose structure we saw just a couple of pages back).

<img src="media/image544.emf"
style="width:4.83333in;height:2.01875in" />

fig 10

After we break down and oxidize sugar and fat molecules to obtain
energy, we use that energy to build large, complex molecules (like
cholesterol, or DNA) out of small, simple precursors. Many biosynthetic
pathways are *reductive*: the carbons in the large biomolecule products
are in a reduced state compared to the small precursors. Look at the
structure of cholesterol compared to that of acetate, the precursor
molecule from which all of its carbon atoms are derived - you can see
that cholesterol is overall a more reduced molecule.

<img src="media/image545.emf"
style="width:4.85208in;height:1.52778in" />

fig 11

While we are focusing here on the mechanistic details of the individual
organic redox reactions involved in metabolism, if you take a course in
biochemistry you will learn much more about the bigger picture of how
all of these reactions fit together in living systems.

**Section 15.3: Hydrogenation of carbonyl and imine groups**

Next, we'll go on to look at the actual chemical mechanisms involved in
the enzyme-catalyzed oxidation and reduction of biomolecules.

<u>15.3A: An overview of hydrogenation and dehydrogenation</u>

Many of the redox reactions that you will encounter when studying the
central metabolic pathways are classified as **hydrogenation** or
**dehydrogenation** reactions. Hydrogenation is simply the net addition
of a hydrogen (H<sub>2</sub>) molecule to a compound, in the form of a
**hydride ion** (H<sup>-</sup>, a proton plus a pair of electrons) and a
proton. ***Hydrogenation corresponds to reduction***. Dehydrogenation
reactions are the reverse process: loss of a hydride and a proton.
***Dehydrogenation corresponds to oxidation***.

<img src="media/image546.emf"
style="width:4.46319in;height:1.74097in" />

fig 2

Hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions can also be called **hydride
transfer** reactions, because a hydride ion is transferred from the
molecule being oxidized to the one being reduced. In the next few
sections, we will learn about two important classes of coenzyme
molecules that serve **hydride ion acceptors** (oxidizing agents) and
**hydride ion donors** (reducing agents) in biochemical redox reactions.

Be careful not to confuse the terms *hyd**<u>rogen</u>**ation* and
*dehy**<u>drogen</u>**ation* with *hydration* and *dehydration* - the
latter terms refer to the gain or loss of *water*, while the former
terms refer to the gain or loss of *hydrogen*.

Many mechanistic patterns that we have already learned about in previous
chapters will come into play again in this discussion, with the only
variation being that here, a *hydride ion* will act as a nucleophile (in
the hydrogenation direction) or as a leaving group (in the
dehydrogenation direction). The key to understanding these reactions
will be to understand how a hydride can act as a nucleophile or leaving
group.

<u>15.3B: Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide - a hydride transfer
coenzyme</u>

Although we are talking here about hydrides acting as nucleophiles and
leaving groups, you already know that *literal* hydride ions are far too
unstable to exist as discreet intermediates in the organic reactions of
living cells (the pKa of H<sub>2</sub>, the conjugate acid of hydride,
is about 35: a *very* weak acid, meaning hydride is a *very* strong base
and not a reasonable species to propose for a biochemical reaction). As
was alluded to earlier, biochemical hydrogenation/dehydrogenation steps
require the participation of a specialized hydride transfer coenzyme.
The most important of these is a molecule called **nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide**. The full structure of the oxidized form of this
coenzyme, abbreviated **NAD<sup>+</sup>**, is shown below, with the
active nicotinamide group colored blue. Because the redox chemistry
occurs specifically at the nicotinamide ring (in blue in the figure
below), typically the rest of the molecule is simply designated as an
'R' group.

<img src="media/image547.emf"
style="width:5.22222in;height:1.97778in" />

fig 16

If the hydroxyl group indicated by the arrow is phosphorylated, the
coenzyme is called NADP<sup>+</sup>. The phosphate is located far from
the nicotinamide ring and does not participate directly in the hydride
transfer function of the cofactor. It is, however, important in a larger
metabolic context: as a general rule, redox enzymes involved in
catabolism (the breakdown of large molecules) typically use the
non-phosphorylated coenzyme, while those involved in anabolism
(biosynthesis of large molecules from small precursors) use the
phosphorylated coenzyme.

NAD<sup>+</sup> and NADP<sup>+</sup> both function in biochemical redox
reactions as **hydride acceptors**: that is, as oxidizing agents. The
reduced forms of the coenzyme, abbreviated NADH and NADPH, serve as
**hydride donors**: that is, as reducing agents.

<img src="media/image548.emf" style="width:3.79653in;height:2in" />

fig 5

fig 17

To understand how the nicotinamide coenzymes function in hydride
transfer, let's look at a general picture of a reversible, redox
conversion from a ketone to a secondary alcohol. Mechanistically, the
reaction we are about to see can be described as a nucleophilic addition
to a carbonyl - a mechanism type we studied in chapter 10 - with the
twist that the nucleophilic species is a hydride ion. At the beginning
of the reaction cycle, both the ketone substrate and the NADH cofactor
are bound in the enzyme's active site, and carbon \#4 of the
nicotinamide ring is positioned very close to the carbonyl carbon of the
ketone.

NAD(P)H-dependent hydrogenation (reduction) of a ketone

<img src="media/image549.emf"
style="width:2.46319in;height:0.79653in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image550.emf" style="width:4.29653in;height:2.75in" />

fig 18, fig 18a

As an enzymatic group transfers a proton to the ketone oxygen, the
carbonyl carbon loses electron density and becomes more electrophilic,
and is attacked by a hydride from NADH. Because carbon \#4 of NADH is
bound in such close proximity to the electrophile, this step can occur
*without generating a free hydride ion intermediate* – the two hydride
electrons can be pictured as *shifting* from one carbon to another. Note
the products of this reaction: the ketone (which accepted a hydride and
a proton) has been reduced to an alcohol, and the NADH cofactor (which
donated a hydride) has been oxidized to NAD<sup>+</sup>.

The dehydrogenation of an alcohol by NAD<sup>+</sup> is simply the
reverse of a ketone hydrogenation:

NAD(P)<sup>+</sup>-dependent dehydrogenation (oxidation) of an alcohol

<img src="media/image551.emf"
style="width:2.57431in;height:0.79653in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image552.emf"
style="width:4.46319in;height:2.71319in" />

fig 19 fig 19a

An enzymatic base positioned above the carbonyl removes a proton, and
the electrons in the O-H bond shift down and push out the hydride, which
shifts over to carbon \#4 of NAD<sup>+</sup>. Note that the same process
with a primary alcohol would yield an aldehyde instead of a ketone.

<u>Exercise 15.4</u>: Draw general mechanisms for:

a\) hydrogenation of an imine

b\) dehydrogenation of an amine

<u>Exercise 15.5</u>: We just saw that when the nucleophile in a
nucleophilic carbonyl addition step is a hydride ion from NADH, the
result is a ketone/aldehyde hydrogenation reaction. As a review: what
kind of reaction step results when the nucleophile in this process is
not a hydride ion but a) an alcohol, or b) an enolate carbon?

The nicotinamide coenzymes also serve as hydride donors/acceptors in the
redox reactions interconverting carboxylic acid derivatives and
aldehydes. Notice that these reactions can be thought of as
*nucleophilic* *acyl substitution reactions* (chapter 11) in which the
nucleophile or leaving group is a hydride ion.

NAD(P)H-dependent hydrogenation (reduction) of a thioester to an
aldehyde:

<img src="media/image553.emf"
style="width:2.94444in;height:0.87986in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image554.emf"
style="width:5.52778in;height:2.47222in" />

fig 20 fig 20a

NAD(P)+-dependent dehydrogenation (oxidation) of an aldehyde to a
thioester:

<img src="media/image555.emf"
style="width:3.01875in;height:0.74097in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image556.emf"
style="width:5.04653in;height:2.80556in" />

fig 21 fig 21a

To simplify figures, hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions are
often drawn with the role of the coenzyme abbreviated:

<img src="media/image557.emf"
style="width:2.22222in;height:3.11111in" />

fig 22

However, it is very important to make sure that you can remember and
draw out the full mechanism, including the role of the coenzyme, in
these types of reactions.

**Caution!** A very common error made by students learning how to draw
biochemical redox mechanisms is to incorrectly show nicotinamide
coenzymes acting as acids or bases. Remember: NADH and NADPH are
*hydride* donors, **NOT** proton donors. NAD<sup>+</sup> and
NADP<sup>+</sup> are *hydride* acceptors, **NOT** proton acceptors.

<u>15.3C: Stereochemistry of ketone hydrogenation</u>

It should not surprise you that the stereochemical outcomes of enzymatic
hydrogenation / dehydrogenation steps are very specific. Consider the
hydrogenation of an asymmetric ketone: In the hydrogenation direction,
attack by the hydride can occur from either the *re* or the *si* face of
an asymmetric ketone (see section 10.1C), leading specifically to the
*S* or *R* alcohol.

<img src="media/image558.emf"
style="width:5.88889in;height:2.63889in" />

fig 23

The stereochemical configuration of the product depends on which side of
the ketone substrate the NAD(P)H coenzyme is bound in the active site.
Any given enzyme will catalyze its reaction with *one* of these two
stereochemical outcomes, not both.

Stereochemical considerations apply in the dehydrogenase direction as
well: in general, enzymes specifically catalyze the oxidation of either
an *R* or S alcohol, but not both.

<img src="media/image559.emf"
style="width:3.37986in;height:1.94444in" />

fig 24

<u>Exercise 15.6:</u> During an intense workout, lactic acid forms in
muscle tissue as the result of enzymatic reduction of a ketone group in
the precursor molecule (EC 1.1.1.27). It is the lactate that you can
blame for the sore muscles you feel the day after a workout.

<img src="media/image560.emf"
style="width:0.85208in;height:1.05556in" />

fig 25

a\) Draw the structure of the starting ketone in this reaction.

b\) Which face of the ketone is the coenzyme positioned next to in the
active site of the enzyme?

<u>15.3D: Examples of biochemical carbonyl/imine hydrogenation</u>

Now that we have covered the basics, let's look at some real examples of
hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions.

Glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.8) catalyzes one of the final
chemical steps in the breakdown of fat molecules. The enzyme
specifically oxidizes (*R*)-glycerol phosphate to dihydroxyacetone
phosphate. (*S*)-glycerol phosphate is *not* a substrate for this
enzyme. *J. Mol. Biol*. **2006**, *357*, 858 (human crystal structure)

<img src="media/image561.emf"
style="width:4.93542in;height:2.24097in" />

fig 26

The reverse reaction (catalyzed by the same enzyme) converts
dihydroxyacetone phosphate to (*R*)-glycerol phosphate, which serves as
a starting point for the biosynthesis of membrane lipid molecules (see
section 1.3A).

<img src="media/image562.emf"
style="width:4.69444in;height:1.79653in" />

fig 26a

<u>Exercise 15.7</u>: X-ray crystallography experiments reveal that in
the active site of glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase, a zinc cation
(Zn<sup>+2</sup>) is coordinated to the oxygen atom of the
carbonyl/alcohol group. How does this contribute to catalysis of the
reaction?

While the cell membranes of animals, plants, and bacteria are made from
lipids with the *R* stereochemistry exclusively, archaeal microbes (the
so-called 'third kingdom of life) are distinguished in part by the *S*
stereochemistry of their membranes.

<img src="media/image563.emf"
style="width:5.33333in;height:3.05556in" />

fig 27

Archaea have an enzyme that catalyzes hydrogenation of dihydroxyacetone
with the opposite stereochemistry compared to the analogous enzyme in
bacteria and eukaryotes. This archaeal enzyme was identified and
isolated in 1997.

<img src="media/image564.emf"
style="width:4.43542in;height:1.88889in" />

fig 28

In a reaction that is relevant to people who enjoy the occasional 'adult
beverage', an NADH-dependent enzyme (EC 1.1.1.1) in brewer's yeast
produces ethanol by reducing acetaldehyde. This is the final step in the
process by which yeast ferment glucose to ethanol.

<img src="media/image565.emf"
style="width:2.54444in;height:1.06667in" />

fig 29

The reaction below, which is the final step in the biosynthesis of
proline (EC 1.5.1.2), is an example of an enzymatic reduction of an
imine to an amine. *J. Mol. Biol*. **2005**, *354*, 91.

<img src="media/image566.emf"
style="width:4.05556in;height:2.27778in" />

fig 30

This step in the breakdown of the amino acids glutamate (EC 1.4.1.2)
provides an example of the oxidation of an amine to an imine:
*Structure* **1999**, *7*, 769.

<img src="media/image567.emf"
style="width:2.90764in;height:1.90764in" />

The 'double reduction' reaction below (EC 1.1.1.34) is part of the
isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway, which eventually leads to cholesterol
in humans.

<img src="media/image568.emf"
style="width:4.28889in;height:0.92222in" />

fig 32a

In this reaction, a thioester is first reduced to an aldehyde in steps
1a and 1b:

<img src="media/image569.emf"
style="width:5.32431in;height:3.74097in" />

Then in step 2, the aldehyde is in turn reduced by the same enzyme (and
a second NADPH that enters the active site) to a primary alcohol. This
enzyme is inhibited by atorvastatin and other members of the statin
family of cholesterol-lowering drugs. Atorvastatin, marketed under the
trade name Lipitor by Pfizer, is one of the all-time best-selling
prescription medications.

Recall from chapter 11 that carboxylates are not reactive in acyl
substitution steps, so it follows that they cannot be *directly* reduced
to aldehydes by an enzyme in the same way that thioesters can. However,
a carboxylate can be converted to its 'activated' acyl phosphate form
(section 11.4), which can then be hydrogenated. An example of this is
found in a two-reaction sequence found in amino acid metabolism (EC
2.7.2.11; EC1.2.1.41).

<img src="media/image570.emf"
style="width:5.85208in;height:1.19444in" />

fig 33

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.12) , a key enzyme in
the glycolysis pathway, provides an example of the oxidation of an
aldehyde to a thioester, in this case a thioester linkage between the
substrate and a cysteine residue in the enzyme's active site. In the
second phase of the reaction, the thioester intermediate is hydrolyzed
to free the carboxylate product.

<img src="media/image571.emf"
style="width:5.68542in;height:3.08333in" />

fig 34

<u>Exercise 15.8</u>: Below is the final step in the biosynthesis of the
amino acid histidine (EC 1.1.1.23). Fill in the species that are
indicated with question marks. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A*. **2002**,
*99*, 1859

<img src="media/image572.emf"
style="width:3.32431in;height:1.60208in" />

fig 35

<u>Exercise 15.9</u>: Draw a likely mechanism for the conversion of
glucose to sorbitol, a process that occurs in the liver. Do not
abbreviate the nicotinamide ring structure.

<img src="media/image573.emf"
style="width:3.92222in;height:1.15556in" />

fig 35a

<u>15.3E: Reduction of ketones and aldehydes in the laboratory</u>

Although our focus in this book is biological organic reactions, it is
interesting to note that synthetic organic chemists frequently perform
hydrogenation reactions in the lab that are similar in many respects to
the NAD(P)H-dependent reactions that we have just finished studying. A
reagent called sodium borohydride (NaBH<sub>4</sub>) is very commonly
used, often in methanol solvent, to reduce ketones and aldehydes to
alcohols. The reagent is essentially a laboratory equivalent of NADH (or
NADPH): it serves as a source of nucleophilic hydride ions. Sodium
borohydride is a selective reagent in the sense that it will reduce
ketones and aldehydes but not carboxylic acid derivatives such as esters
(recall from section 11.2 and 11.3 that the carbonyl carbons of
carboxylic acid derivatives are less potent electrophiles than the
carbonyl carbons of ketones and aldehydes). Unlike the enzymatic
hydrogenation reactions we saw earlier, the reduction of asymmetric
ketones with sodium borohydride usually results in a 50:50 racemic
mixture of the *R* and *S* enantiomers of the alcohol product.

<img src="media/image574.emf"
style="width:5.22222in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 36

Synthetic organic chemists have at their disposal a wide range of other
reducing and oxidizing reagents with varying specificities and
properties, many of which you will learn about if you take a course in
laboratory synthesis.

<u>Exercise 15.10</u>: Camphor can be easily reduced by sodium
borohydride. However, the mixture of stereoisomeric alcohols that
results is not 50:50.

<img src="media/image575.emf"
style="width:0.71319in;height:1.29653in" />

fig 37

a\) Draw the two stereoisomers of the alcohol products of this reaction,
and explain why they are not formed in a 50:50 ratio.

b\) Which analytical technique - <sup>1</sup>H-NMR, IR, UV, or MS -
could best be used to determine the ratio of the stereoisomers in the
product mix? Describe how this analysis could be accomplished.

**Section 15.4: Hydrogenation of alkenes and dehydrogenation of
alkanes**

We turn next to reactions in which a hydrogen molecule is added to the
double bond of an alkene, forming an alkane - and the reverse, in which
H<sub>2</sub> is eliminated from an alkane to form an alkene. Many
biochemical reactions of this type involve α,β-unsaturated thioesters.

<img src="media/image576.emf"
style="width:3.94444in;height:1.74097in" />

fig 38

<u>15.4A: Alkene hydrogenation</u>

In the cell, alkene hydrogenation most often occurs at the α and β
position relative to a carbonyl. This type of alkene hydrogenation is
essentially a conjugate addition (section 11.4) of hydrogen, with a
hydride ion (often from NAD(P)H) acting as the nucleophile in the first
step.

NAD(P)H-dependent hydrogenation (reduction) of an α,β-conjugated alkene:

<img src="media/image577.emf"
style="width:4.37986in;height:0.77778in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image578.emf"
style="width:5.97222in;height:2.08333in" />

fig 39 fig 39a

As part of the fatty acid synthesis pathway, a double bond between the α
and β carbons of a fatty acid is reduced to a single bond by
hydrogenation (EC 1.3.1.10). The fatty acid is attached to an
acyl-carrier protein via a thioester linkage (section 11.5A).

<img src="media/image579.emf"
style="width:4.02778in;height:0.90764in" />

fig 40

It can be easy to forget but important to remember that there is a lot
of stereospecificity inherent in biochemical reactions, including this
one - even though no chiral centers are involved. First, notice that the
substrate contains a *trans* (*E*) alkene. Next, let's add some more
information about *prochirality*:

<img src="media/image580.emf"
style="width:4.36111in;height:2.33333in" />

fig40a

Notice that in this particular reaction it is specifically the *pro-R*
hydride on NADPH that is delivered to the substrate. Also notice that
both the hydride and proton are added to the *re* faces of the α and β
carbons of the substrate, and become the *pro-R* and *pro-S* hydrogen
atoms, respectively, on the product. This level of stereospecificity,
you should recall from previous discussions, stems from the highly
precise positioning of substrate and cofactor within the active site of
the enzyme.

Other hydrogenase enzymes are known to deliver the *pro-S* hydride of
NADH or NADPH to their substrate, and there are many examples of
biochemical conjugate addition reactions in which the nucleophile and
proton are added from *opposite* sides. Always keep in mind that
stereochemistry is a key element in the amazing diversity of biological
organic reactions.

<u>15.4B: Flavin-dependent alkane dehydrogenation</u>

Next, let's consider an alkane dehydrogenation reaction (EC 1.3.99.3) in
the fatty acid degradation pathway. Here, a double bond is introduced
between the α and β carbons, with concurrent loss of a hydride ion and a
proton.

<img src="media/image581.emf"
style="width:4.97222in;height:1.32431in" />

fig 41

This reaction is clearly *not* the reverse of the hydrogenation reaction
we just saw from fatty acid biosynthesis. First of all, you should
notice that the thioester linkage is to coenzyme A rather than acyl
carrier protein (ACP). More importantly to this discussion, while the
hydride donor in the biosynthetic hydrogenation reaction is NADPH, the
relevant coenzyme in the catabolic direction is *not* NAD<sup>+</sup> or
NADP<sup>+</sup> - rather, it is a **flavin coenzyme.**

**Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD**) is composed of three components:
the three-ring flavin system, ribose phosphate, and AMP. An alternate
form, which is missing the AMP component, is called **flavin
mononucleotide (FMN)**.

<img src="media/image582.emf"
style="width:5.85208in;height:3.11111in" />

fig 42

The reactive part of the coenzyme is the flavin group, so usually the
rest of the molecule is abbreviated with 'R'.

FAD and FMN are the oxidized form of flavin. The reduced (hydrogenated)
forms of these cofactors are abbreviated FADH<sub>2</sub> and
FMNH<sub>2</sub>.

<img src="media/image583.emf" style="width:3.97778in;height:2in" />

fig 43

The flavin coenzymes are synthesized in humans from riboflavin (vitamin
B<sub>2</sub>), which we obtain from our diet (the structure of
riboflavin is the same as that of FMN, except that riboflavin lacks the
phosphate group). Notice the extended conjugated π system in the three
fused rings: the flavin system absorbs light in the visible wavelengths
and has a distinctive deep yellow color - it is riboflavin, and to some
extent FAD and FMN, that give urine its color.

Like the nicotinamide coenzymes, flavin serves as a hydride donor or
acceptor. FAD and FMN are able to accept a hydride ion (and a proton),
and FADH<sub>2</sub> and FMNH<sub>2</sub> in turn can serve as hydride
donors in hydrogenation reactions.

<img src="media/image584.emf"
style="width:5.77778in;height:2.51875in" />

fig 44

Below is a general mechanism for the dehydration of an alkene at the α,β
position - notice that it is mechanistically an E1cb elimination of
H<sub>2</sub>.

Flavin-dependent α,β dehydrogenation (oxidation) of an alkane:

<img src="media/image585.emf"
style="width:3.65764in;height:0.82431in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image586.emf"
style="width:3.68542in;height:4.29653in" />

fig 45 fig 45a

In many enzymatic reactions in which FADH<sub>2</sub> acts as the
reducing agent, the reaction cycle is completed when FAD, rather than
being released from the active site, is recycled back to
FADH<sub>2</sub> with the concomitant oxidation of NADH.

<img src="media/image587.emf"
style="width:5.68542in;height:3.08333in" />

fig 51g

Hydride ion transfer with flavin or nicotinamide coenzymes is a *two
electron* redox process. However, unlike the nicotinamide cofactors,
flavins are also able to function in *single* electron transfer
(radical) mechanisms. We will come back to this idea briefly in the
chapter 16.

<u>Exercise 15.11</u>: Fumarate is formed in an alkane dehydrogenation
reaction (EC 1.3.5.1) which is part of the citric acid cycle:

<img src="media/image588.emf"
style="width:2.85208in;height:1.10208in" />

fig 46

a\) Predict the structure of the starting substrate in this reaction

b\) Draw the structure of the enolate intermediate

<u>Exercise 15.12</u>: Reduced flavin can serve as the hydride *donor*
in some hydrogenation reactions. Degradation of the RNA base uracil
begins with hydrogenation of a conjugated alkene group by a
flavin-dependent hydrogenase enzyme (EC 1.3.1.2). Predict the product of
this step, and draw curved arrows for the first mechanistic step.

fig 47

**  
**

**Section 15.5: Monitoring hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions
by UV spectroscopy**

In order to study any enzyme-catalyzed reaction, a researcher must have
available some sort of test, or **assay**, in order to observe and
measure the reaction's progress and measure its rate. In many cases, an
assay simply involves running the reaction for a specified length of
time, then isolating and quantifying the product using a separation
technique such as high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) or gas
chromatography (GC). This type of assay can be extremely time-consuming,
however, so it is to the researcher's great advantage if a more
convenient assay can be found.

Redox reactions in which a nicotinamide coenzyme participates as a
hydride donor or acceptor are generally quite convenient to assay. In
fact, the progress of these reactions can usually be observed in real
time, meaning that the researcher doesn't need to stop the reaction in
order to see how far it has progressed. NADPH and NADH have distinctive
*n*-π\* UV absorbance bands centered at 340 nm, with a molar
absorptivity of 6290 M<sup>-1</sup> cm<sup>-1</sup> (section 4.4). The
oxidized coenzymes NADP<sup>+</sup> and NAD<sup>+</sup> do not absorb at
this wavelength.

<img src="media/image589.emf"
style="width:5.10208in;height:3.30556in" />

fig 48

Therefore, the course of a hydrogenation reaction, in which NAD(P)H is
converted to NAD(P)<sup>+</sup>, can be observed in real time if it is
run in a quartz cuvette in a UV spectrometer. By observing the decrease
in absorbance at 340 nm, the researcher can calculate how much NAD(P)H
has been oxidized to NAD(P)<sup>+</sup> at any given time point, and
this number is the molar equivalent of the amount of organic substrate
that has been reduced:

<img src="media/image590.emf"
style="width:5.54653in;height:0.86111in" />

fig 48a

Likewise, a NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent dehydrogenase reaction can be
followed in real time by monitoring the *increase* in absorbance at 340
nm as NAD<sup>+</sup> is converted to NADH.

<u>Exercise 15.13</u>: You are observing the progress of the
(*R*)-glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase reaction shown in the figure
below.

<img src="media/image591.emf"
style="width:3.73333in;height:1.11111in" />

You run the reaction in a quartz cuvette (path length 1 cm) in a total
solution volume of 1 mL. You start with 200 μM substrate and 100 μM
NADP<sup>+</sup> in solution, zero the UV spectrophotometer, then add
the enzyme to start the reaction. After 5 minutes, the A<sub>340</sub>
reading has climbed from 0.000 to 0.096. At this time point:

a\) How many moles of substrate have been oxidized?

b\) What is the solution concentration of NADP<sup>+</sup>?

c\) The enzyme has a mass of 25 kilodaltons (25,000 g/mol).You added 5
μL of a 2 ng/μL solution of pure enzyme to start the reaction. How many
reactions does each enzyme molecule catalyze, on average, per second?
(This number is referred to by biochemists as the 'turnover number').

**Section 15.6: Redox reactions of thiols and disulfides**

A **disulfide bond** is a sulfur-sulfur bond, usually formed from two
free thiol groups.

<img src="media/image592.emf"
style="width:1.80556in;height:1.32431in" />

fig 49

The interconversion between dithiol and disulfide groups is a redox
reaction: the free dithiol form is in the reduced state, and the
disulfide form is in the oxidized state. Notice that in the oxidized
(disulfide) state, each sulfur atom has lost a bond to hydrogen and
gained a bond to sulfur.

As you should recall from your Biology courses, disulfide bonds between
cysteine residues are an integral component of the three-dimensional
structure of many extracellular proteins and signaling peptides.

<img src="media/image593.emf"
style="width:4.64444in;height:4.26667in" />

fig 49

fig 49a

A thiol-containing coenzyme called **glutathione** is integrally
involved in many thiol-disulfide redox processes (recall that
glutathione was a main player in this chapter's introductory story about
concussion research). In its reduced (thiol) form, glutathione is
abbreviated 'GSH'. In its oxidized form, glutathione exists as a dimer
of two molecules linked by a disulfide group, and is abbreviated 'GSSG'.

<img src="media/image594.emf"
style="width:5.97222in;height:2.82431in" />

fig 50

Disulfide bonds and free thiol groups in both proteins and smaller
organic molecules like glutathione can 'trade places' through a
**disulfide exchange** reaction. This process is essentially a
combination of two direct displacement (S<sub>N</sub>2-like) events,
with sulfur atoms acting as nucleophile, electrophile *and* leaving
group.

Disulfide exchange reaction

<img src="media/image595.emf"
style="width:3.46319in;height:0.85208in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image596.emf"
style="width:4.43542in;height:3.35208in" />

fig 51

In eukaryotes, the cysteine side chains of intracellular (inside the
cell) proteins are almost always in the free thiol (reduced) state due
to the high concentration of reduced glutathione (GSH) in the
intracellular environment. A disulfide bond in an intracellular protein
will be rapidly reduced in a disulfide exchange reaction with excess
glutathione.

<img src="media/image597.emf"
style="width:3.76875in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 51

The interconversion of free thiols and disulfides is also mediated by
flavin in some enzymes.

Flavin-mediated reduction of a protein disulfide bond

<img src="media/image598.emf"
style="width:5.01875in;height:5.12986in" />

fig51c

Flavin-mediated oxidation of a protein disulfide bond

<img src="media/image599.emf"
style="width:5.69444in;height:5.96319in" />

fig 51h

As was stated earlier, a high intracellular concentration of reduced
glutathione (GSH) serves to maintain proteins in the free thiol
(reduced) state. An enzyme called glutathione reductase catalyzes the
reduction of GSSG in a flavin-mediated process, with NADH acting as the
ultimate hydride donor.

Gluthione reductase reaction:

<img src="media/image600.emf"
style="width:3.08889in;height:1.04444in" />

fig 51a

The mechanism for this and other similar reactions is not yet completely
understood, but evidence points to an initial thiol-disulfide exchange
reaction with a pair of cysteines from the enzyme, (phase 1 below)
followed by flavin-dependent reduction of the cysteine-cysteine
disulfide (phase 2). Finally, (phase 3) FAD is reduced back to
FADH<sub>2</sub> by NADH. Frey and Hegeman, Enzymatic Reaction
Mechanisms, p. 699

Phase 1: thiol-disulfide exchange (*see earlier figure for mechanism*):

<img src="media/image601.emf"
style="width:3.46319in;height:1.05556in" />

fig 51b

Phase 2: Reduction of protein disulfide by FADH<sub>2</sub> (see
*earlier figure for mechanism*)

<img src="media/image602.emf"
style="width:3.74097in;height:0.63889in" />

fig 51c

Phase 3: regeneration of FADH<sub>2</sub> by NADH (*see section 15.4B
for mechanism*)

<img src="media/image603.emf"
style="width:2.02778in;height:0.61111in" />

fig 51d

In the biochemistry lab, proteins are often maintained in their reduced
(free thiol) state by incubation in buffer containing an excess
concentration of β-mercaptoethanol (BME) or dithiothreitol (DTT). These
reducing agents function in a manner similar to that of GSH, except that
DTT, because it has two thiol groups, can form an *intramolecular*
disulfide in its oxidized form.

<img src="media/image604.emf" style="width:3in;height:1.19444in" />

fig 52

<u>Exercise 15.14:</u> Draw structures of the oxidized (disulfide) forms
of BME and DTT.

**Section 15.7: Flavin-dependent monooxygenase reactions: hydroxylation,
epoxidation, and the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation**

Up to now, the redox reaction examples we have seen have all been either
hydrogenation/dehydrogenation transformations or interconversions
between free thiols and disulfides. However, there are many important
redox reactions in biological chemistry which do not fall under either
of these descriptions. **Oxygenase** enzymes catalyze the insertion of
one or two oxygen atoms from molecular oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>) into an
organic substrate molecule. Enzymes which insert a single oxygen atom
are called **monooxygenases**. Below are two examples of biochemical
transformations catalyzed by monooxygenase enzymes: one is a
hydroxylation, the other is an epoxidation (an **epoxide** functional
group is composed of a three-membered carbon-carbon-oxygen ring -
epoxides are somewhat rare in biological organic chemistry but are very
common and useful intermediates in laboratory organic synthesis).

<img src="media/image605.emf"
style="width:3.60208in;height:2.54653in" />

fig 56

**Dioxygenase** enzymes insert both oxygen atoms from O<sub>2</sub> into
the substrate, and usually involve cleavage of an aromatic ring. Below
is an example of a dioxygenase reaction, catalyzed by catechol
dioxygenase:

<img src="media/image606.emf"
style="width:3.61111in;height:0.66667in" />

In the reduction direction, reductases *remove* oxygen atoms, or
sometimes other electronegative heteratoms such as nitrogen or halides.
For example, DNA **deoxy**ribonucleosides are converted from their
corresponding RNA ribonucleosides by the action of reductase enzymes:

<img src="media/image607.emf"
style="width:4.44444in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 58

Many oxygenase and reductase reactions involve the participation of
enzyme-bound transition metals - such as iron or copper - and the
mechanistic details of these reactions are outside the scope of our
discussion. A variety of biochemical monooxygenase reactions, however,
involve flavin as a redox cofactor, and we do have sufficient background
knowledge at this point to understand these mechanisms. In
flavin-dependent monooxygenase reactions, the key intermediate species
is **flavin hydroperoxide**.

The term 'peroxide' refers to a functional group characterized by an
oxygen-oxygen single bond. The simplest peroxide is hydrogen peroxide
(HOOH) about which we will have more to say below. In flavin
hydroperoxide, the peroxide group is linked to one of the carbons of the
reactive triple-ring system of the coenzyme. A possible mechanism for
the formation of flavin peroxide from FADH<sub>2</sub> and molecular
oxygen is shown below.

Silverman, R.B. The Organic Chemistry of Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions, p.
121-122, Scheme 3.33. 2000, Academic Press, San Diego.

Mechanism for the formation of flavin hydroperoxide:

<img src="media/image608.emf"
style="width:5.30556in;height:2.18542in" />

fig 59a

(Note: Implicit in this mechanism is that the molecular oxygen first
undergoes spin inversion from the triplet state to the higher energy
'singlet' state. You may recall from your general chemistry course that
molecular oxygen exists in two states: 'singlet' oxygen has a double
bond and no unpaired electrons, while 'triplet' oxygen has a single O-O
bond and two unpaired electrons - a kind of 'double radical'. Molecular
orbital theory - and experimental evidence - show that the triplet state
is lower in energy.

<img src="media/image609.emf"
style="width:2.30556in;height:0.68542in" />

fig 60

The mechanism shown above is one proposed mechanism, another proposal
involves triplet oxygen reacting with flavin in a series of
radical-intermediate, single-electron steps.)

Flavin hydroperoxide can be thought of as an activated form of molecular
oxygen. ***Peroxides in general are potent oxidizing agents, because the
oxygen-oxygen single bond is quite weak***: only 138 kJ/mole, compared
to 339 kJ/mol for a carbon-carbon bond, and 351 kJ/mol for a
carbon-oxygen bond. When the 'outer' oxygen of flavin hydroperoxide (red
in our figure above) comes into close proximity to the π-bonded
electrons of an alkene or aromatic group, the O-O bond will break,
leaving an empty orbital on the outer oxygen to be filled by the π
electrons - thus, a new carbon-oxygen bond is formed. This is what is
happening in step 1 of a reaction in the tryptophan degradation pathway
catalyzed by kynurenine 3-monooxygenase. Step 2 completes what is,
mechanistically speaking, an electrophilic aromatic substitution
reaction (section 14.4) with an peroxide oxygen electrophile.

Mechanism for the flavin hydroperoxide-dependent hydroxylation of
kynurenine:

<img src="media/image610.emf"
style="width:5.54444in;height:4.78889in" />

fig 61a

<img src="media/image611.emf"
style="width:5.12222in;height:4.17778in" />

fig 61

Elimination of water from the hydroxyflavin intermediate then leads to
formation of FAD (step 3), which is subsequently reduced back to
FADH<sub>2</sub> by NADH (step 4).

The *N*-hydroxylation reaction below, which is part of the of the
biosynthetic pathway of an iron-binding molecule in the pathogenic
bacterium *Pseudomonas aeruginosa,* is mechanistically similar to the
*C*-hydroxylation reaction we just saw, except that the nucleophile is
an amine nitrogen. Note that FADH<sub>2</sub> is shown in brackets below
the reaction arrow, indicating that reduced flavin participates in the
reaction but is not used up - rather it is regenerated in the active
site at the end of the reaction cycle.

<img src="media/image612.emf"
style="width:4.14444in;height:1.33333in" />

fig 61b

<u>Exercise 15.15</u>: Draw arrows for the N-O bond-forming step in the
ornithine hydroxylation reaction above.

**Epoxides,** characterized by a three-membered ring composed of two
carbons and one oxygen, are a very common and useful functional group
employed in synthetic organic chemistry. Although rare, there are some
interesting epoxide-forming reactions in biochemical pathways, catalyzed
by flavin-dependent monooxygenase enzymes.

In a key step in the biosynthesis of cholesterol and other steroid
compounds, an alkene is converted to an epoxide in a precursor molecule
called squalene. Flavin hydroperoxide also serves as the direct
oxidizing agent in this step:

Mechanism for the flavin-hydroperoxide-dependent epoxidation of
squalene:

<img src="media/image613.emf" style="width:6in;height:3.54889in" />

fig 62

Oxidosqualene goes on to cyclize to lanosterol in a complex and
fascinating electrophilic reaction which we discussed in section 14.5.

Epoxidation reactions have a parallel in the synthetic organic
laboratory, and in fact are very important tools in organic synthesis.
In laboratory epoxidations, **peroxyacids** are the counterpart to
flavin hydroperoxide in biochemical epoxidations.
*meta*-chloroperoxybenxoic acid (MCPBA) is a commonly used peroxyacid.

<img src="media/image614.emf"
style="width:3.87986in;height:1.32431in" />

fig 62d

The Baeyer-Villiger oxidation, in which a ketone is converted to an
ester through treatment with a peroxide reagent, is an extremely useful
laboratory organic synthesis reaction discovered in the late 19th
century. Recently, many biochemical examples of Baeyer-Villiger
oxidations have been discovered: the reaction below, for example, is
catalyzed by a monooxygenase in a thermophilic bacterium:

(*Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A*. **2004**, *101*, 13157)

A Baeyer-Villiger oxidation:

<img src="media/image615.emf" style="width:4.71111in;height:1.2in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image616.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.83051in" />

fig 62a

The Baeyer-Villiger mechanism is differs significantly from the
hydroxylation reactions we saw earlier, although flavin hydroperoxide
(abbreviated in the above figure) still plays a key role. Here, the
peroxide oxygen is a nucleophile, rather than an electrophile, attacking
the ketone carbonyl in step 1. Step 2 is a rearrangement, similar in
many ways to the hydride and alkyl shifts we learned about in section
14.5. The electrons in the red bond in the figure shift over one atom:
from the carbonyl carbon to the outer peroxide oxygen. The end result is
that an oxygen atom, from O<sub>2</sub> via flavin hydroperoxide, has
been inserted between the carbonyl carbon and a neighboring methylene
(CH<sub>2</sub>) carbon, forming an ester.

Note that in the reaction mechanism above, the ketone substrate is
*asymmetric*: on one side of the carbonyl there is a benzyl group
(CH<sub>2</sub>-phenyl), and on the other side a methyl group. Note also
that it is the benzyl group, not the methyl, that shifts in step 2 of
the mechanism. For reasons that are not yet well understood, in
Baeyer-Villiger reactions the alkyl group with higher carbocation
stability has a higher **migratory aptitude**: in other words, it has a
lower energy barrier for the shifting step.

<u>Exercise 15.16</u>: Draw the product of a *hypothetical*
Baeyer-Villiger reaction involving the same substrate as the above
figure, in which the methyl rather than the benzyl group shifts.

<u>Exercise 15.17</u>: Draw the likely major product of a hypothetical
Baeyer Villiger reaction starting with 2-methylcyclopentanone as the
substrate. Take into account the idea of migratory aptitude.

Below is another example of a Baeyer-Villiger reaction in which a cyclic
ketone is oxidized to a lactone (cyclic ester). Notice that oxygen
insertion expands the ring from 6 to 7 atoms. This is the third-to-last
step in the biosynthesis of the anti-cancer agent mithromycin in some
bacterial species (*ACS Chem. Biol*. **2013**, *8*, 2466).

<img src="media/image617.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.69307in" />

fig 62c

Yet another variety of flavin-dependent monooxygenase, which bears some
mechanistic similarity to the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation, is the
decarboxylative reaction below from biosynthesis of the plant hormone
auxin: (*J. Biol. Chem.* **2013**, *288*, 1448)

<img src="media/image618.emf"
style="width:4.22222in;height:1.43333in" />

fig 62e

<u>Exercise 15.18</u>: Propose a mechanism for the above reaction,
starting with flavin hydroperoxide.

**Section 15.8: Hydrogen peroxide as a dangerous Reactive Oxygen
Species**

We get our energy from the oxidation of organic molecules such as fat
and carbohydrates, as electrons from these reduced compounds are
transferred to molecular oxygen, thereby reducing it to water. Reducing
O<sub>2</sub>, however, turns out to be a hazardous activity: harmful
side products called **reactive oxygen species** (ROS) are inevitably
formed in the process. Recall from the story introducing this chapter
that ROS appear to play an important role in the damage that occurs to
the brain immediately after a concussion.

Hydrogen peroxide, HOOH, is an ROS. Recall peroxides are potent
oxidizing agents due to the weakness of the O-O single bond. It is this
same weak bond that causes hydrogen peroxide to be dangerous when
produced in our bodies, as it can react spontaneously with oxygen or
nitrogen nucleophiles and π bonds.

Peroxide formed as a by-product of our metabolism is particularly
harmful when it oxidizes DNA bases. In just one of many known examples
of oxidative damage, the DNA base cytosine is oxidized to thymine glycol
in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. Although mechanistic details for
reactions such as these are not yet well understood, one possibility is
electrophilic addition:

<img src="media/image619.emf" style="width:5.25in;height:1.65764in" />

fig 53

Our bodies have evolved ways to dispose of the harmful reactive oxygen
species that are continuously being formed (the only way to stop the
production of ROS is to stop breathing oxygen!). Glutathione peroxidase
is a remarkable enzyme in that its active site contains selanocysteine,
a modified cysteine residue in which the side chain sulfur is replaced
by selenium (selenium is very toxic, but we do need a very small amount
of it in our diet). Look at a periodic table: selenium is below oxygen
and sulfur in the same column. If you think back to the vertical
periodic trends in nucleophilicity (section 8.2B), you'll recall that
just as a thiol is a better nucleophile than an alcohol, a selanol
(RSeH) is even more nucleophilic than a thiol. Moreover, the vertical
periodic trend in acidity (section 7.3A) tells us that a selenol should
be more acidic than a thiol - in fact, the pKa of a selenocysteine is
about 5.5, meaning that it is mostly in its deprotonated state at
physiological pH, making it even more nucleophilic.

Glutathione peroxidase very efficiently catalyzes the reduction of
hydrogen peroxide to water and the oxidation of glutathione (GSH) to
GSSG, beginning with nucleophilic attack by the enzymatic selanocysteine
on a peroxide oxygen. The intermediates in this process are shown below:
each step can be thought of as a concerted nucleophilic displacement
similar to those that take place in a disulfide exchange reaction.

<img src="media/image620.emf"
style="width:5.71319in;height:2.15764in" />

fig 54

*Eur. J. Biochem*. **1983**, *133*, 51

*Biochem. et Biophys. Acta* **2009**, *1790*, 1486

**Key learning objectives for this chapter**

*Before moving on to the next chapter, you should be able to:*

Recognize when an organic molecule is being oxidized or reduced, and
distinguish between redox and non-redox organic reactions.

Draw complete mechanisms for the following reaction types, including the
structure of the reactive part of the redox coenzyme (*it is strongly
recommended that you commit to memory the structures of the reactive
parts of the nicotinamide and flavin coenzymes).*

> oxidation of an alcohol to an aldehyde or ketone
>
> oxidation of an amine to an imine
>
> oxidation of an aldehyde to a carboxylic acid derivative (usually a
> thioester or carboxylate)
>
> oxidation of an alkane to an alkene at the α,β position relative to a
> carbonyl or imine
>
> reduction of an aldehyde or ketone to an alcohol
>
> reduction of an imine to an amine
>
> reduction of a carboxylic acid derivative to an aldehyde
>
> reduction of an α,β - conjugated alkene to an alkane
>
> oxidation of two thiol groups to a disulfide in a disulfide-exchange
> type reaction
>
> reduction of a disulfide group by flavin
>
> flavin hydroperoxide-dependent hydroxylation, epoxidation, and
> Baeyer-Villiger reactions
>
> reduction of FAD (or FMN) to FADH<sub>2</sub> (or FMNH<sub>2</sub>) by
> NAD(P)H.
>
> spontaneous oxidation of an alkene group in a biomolecule by hydrogen
> peroxide
>
> reduction of hydrogen peroxide by glutathione peroxidase

In addition, you should be able to draw complete mechanisms for
hydrogenation-dehydrogenation and disulfide exchange reactions that we
have not yet seen specific examples of, based on your understanding of
the chemistry involved in these reaction types and organic reaction
patterns in general. Several exercises and end-of-chapter problems
provide opportunities practice with inferring and drawing mechanisms of
less familiar redox reactions.

Given a multistep pathway diagram, you should be able to recognize the
transformations taking place and fill in missing intermediate compounds
or reagents (problem 15.5 is an example of this type).

You should be working on gaining proficiency at solving multi-step
pathway elucidation problems, such as those at the end of this chapter's
problem section.

**Problems**

**P15.1:** Show a mechanism for each of the redox reactions below. Do
not abbreviate the reactive parts of the redox coenzyme.

a\)

<img src="media/image621.emf"
style="width:4.68542in;height:1.35208in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image622.emf"
style="width:4.40764in;height:1.01875in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image623.emf"
style="width:4.11111in;height:0.99097in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image624.emf"
style="width:3.93542in;height:0.71319in" />

e\)

<img src="media/image625.emf"
style="width:4.63889in;height:0.60208in" />

f\)

<img src="media/image626.emf"
style="width:3.52778in;height:0.83333in" />

g\) (regeneration of reduced flavin by NADH):

<img src="media/image627.emf"
style="width:1.88889in;height:0.65764in" />

h\) In reaction (a), near which face of the substrate is the cofactor
bound in the active site?

i\) ) In reaction (d), near which face of the product is the cofactor
bound in the active site?

**P15.2:** In the reactions below ((EC 2.7.2.4; EC 1.2.1.11) , the side
chain of aspartate is altered, but the main peptide chain is not
affected. Show the most probable structure of species A and B.

<img src="media/image628.emf"
style="width:3.44444in;height:1.13889in" />

**P15.3:** Propose complete mechanisms for the following reactions.

a\) (EC 1.3.1.26, from lysine biosynthesis)

<img src="media/image629.emf"
style="width:3.71319in;height:0.91667in" />

(

b\) (EC 1.1.1.205, from guanosine ribonucleotide biosynthesis) The
mechanism involves a covalent cysteine-linked enzyme-substrate
intermediate.

<img src="media/image630.emf"
style="width:3.40764in;height:1.46319in" />

**P15.4:** The first step in the lysine degradation pathway is a
reductive condensation with α-ketoglutarate to form an intermediate
called saccharopine. (EC 1.5.1.8)

a\) Propose a mechanism for this transformation.

<img src="media/image631.emf"
style="width:5.41667in;height:1.12986in" />

b\) Saccharopine (see part (a) above) is then broken up to yield
glutamate and a second product that contains an aldehyde group. Predict
the structure of this second product, and propose a likely mechanism for
the reaction which involves and imine intermediate.

(EC 1.5.1.10

<img src="media/image632.emf"
style="width:5.66667in;height:1.16667in" />

(

**  
**

**P15.5:** Predict the structures of species A and B in the pathway
below.

<img src="media/image633.emf"
style="width:4.68542in;height:2.10208in" />

**P15.6**: Bilirubin, the molecule responsible for the yellowish color
of bruises, is formed from the NADPH-dependent hydrogenation of a double
bond in biliverdin (EC 1.3.1.24), which is a product of heme degradation
(heme is an iron-containing coenzyme in the oxygen-carrying blood
protein hemoglobin). Draw a likely mechanism for this reaction.

<img src="media/image634.emf"
style="width:5.35208in;height:1.36111in" />

**P15.7:** Draw a likely mechanism for each of the reactions below.

**a)** From the oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids: (*J. Biol.
Chem* **2005**, *280*, 3068)

<img src="media/image635.emf"
style="width:3.99097in;height:0.62986in" />

b\) (*ChemBioChem* **2013**, *14*, 1998, Scheme 2

<img src="media/image636.emf"
style="width:5.55556in;height:0.90764in" />

**P15.8**: Predict the structures of pathway intermediates A, B, and C:

<img src="media/image637.emf"
style="width:5.36111in;height:3.36111in" />

**P15.9**: An enzyme called DsbA (EC1.8.4.2) is responsible for the
formation of disulfide bonds in bacterial proteins. The process - which
can be thought of as a 'disulfide exchange', involves the cleavage of a
disulfide bond between two active site cysteines in DsbA. It is
accomplished through two successive S<sub>N</sub>2 displacements.

<img src="media/image638.emf"
style="width:4.90764in;height:1.04653in" />

*Biochemistry* **2000***, 39*, 6732

DsbA is then returned to it's starting (disulfide) state through a
second disulfide exchange reaction with another protein called DsbB:

<img src="media/image639.emf"
style="width:4.61111in;height:2.35208in" />

Scientists were interested in studying the intermediate species formed
in step 3, but found that it is very short-lived and difficult to
isolate. In order to address this problem, they ran the reaction with a
synthetic analog of DsbB that contained an unnatural bromoalanine amino
acid in place of one of the active site cysteines.

a\) Draw a complete mechanism for the disulfide exchange reaction
between DsbA and DsbB.

b\) Show how the bromoalanine-containing DsbB analog allowed for the
isolation of an intermediate that resembles the true, short-lived
intermediate.

(*J. Am. Chem. Soc*. **2004**, *126*, 15060; *J. Nat. Prod*. **2001**,
*64*, 597).

**P15.10:**

a\) In chapter 16 we will learn how ascorbate (vitamin C) acts as a
'radical scavenger' antioxidant to protect our cells from damage by free
radical species. When ascorbate scavenges a radical, it ends up being
converted to dehydroascorbate . One possible metabolic fate of
dehydroascorbate is to be recycled back to ascorbate through an
enzyme-free reaction with glutathione. *Biochemistry* **1999**, *38*,
268.

<img src="media/image640.emf"
style="width:4.11111in;height:1.23333in" />

probfig10a

Suggest a likely mechanism for the enzyme-free reaction.

b\) In the introduction to chapter 16, we will learn that most animals -
but not humans - are able to synthesize their own ascorbate. Humans
cannot synthesize vitamin C because we lack the enzyme for the final
step in the biosynthetic pathway, gulonolactone oxidase:

<img src="media/image641.emf" style="width:4.36667in;height:1.2in" />

This enzyme uses FAD as an oxidizing agent, and FADH<sub>2</sub> is
oxidized back to FAD at the end of the catalytic cycle by molecular
oxygen, with hydrogen peroxide as a side product. Draw out a likely
mechanism showing how gulonolactone is converted to ascorbate, and how
FAD is regenerated.

c\) Artemisinin is a naturally occurring compound with demonstrated
antimalarial properties. It is thought to act by depleting the
malaria-causing microbe's store of reduced flavin, thus disrupting the
redox balance. The relevant reaction is shown below:

<img src="media/image642.emf"
style="width:4.46319in;height:1.74097in" />

Draw mechanistic arrows for the step as shown above. (*Molecules*
**2010**, *15*, 1705)

d\) Draw the mechanistic step in the reaction below in which the C-O
bond indicated by the arrow in the figure below is formed.

<img src="media/image643.emf" style="width:2.77778in;height:1in" />

**P15.11:** Methanogens are a class of microorganisms in the domain
archaea which inhabit a diversity of anaerobic (oxygen-lacking)
environments, from the intestines of humans, to swamp mud, to the base
of deep sea hot water vents. They obtain energy by reducing carbon
dioxide to methane:

CO<sub>2</sub> + 4H<sub>2</sub> → CH<sub>4</sub> + 2 H<sub>2</sub>O +
energy

Methanogenesis', like the oxidation of glucose in animals, is not
accomplished in a single reaction - it requires a long series of
enzymatic steps, and involves the participation of several unique
coenzymes (if you are interested in learning more, see *FEMS Microbiol.
Rev*. **1999**, *23*, 13 for a detailed review of the enzymatic
reactions of methanogenesis).

The oxidation of methane to carbon dioxide when you burn natural gas for
heating your house is obviously an exergonic process. How then is it
possible that reducing carbon dioxide to methane could also be
exergonic? Explain.

**Multistep pathway prediction problems**

In chapters 12 and 13, we were introduced to the challenge of mapping
out potential multi-step transformations using the retrosynthesis
approach, where we start with the more complex molecule and take it
apart step be step. These problems have necessarily involved
hypothetical, generalized transformations, because many of the reaction
types involved in actual biochemical transformations were as-yet
unfamiliar to us.

We have now reached a point in our study of organic reactivity where we
can look at an actual metabolic pathway and probably recognize *most* of
the reactions taking place - so were are ready to try our hand at
mapping out real metabolic pathways.

Before we dive in, you may want to go back to the retrosynthesis
interchapter and review the key elements of the retrosynthetic approach.
You may (or may not) also need a little more practice with some simpler,
shorter, hypothetical problems, similar to what we worked on in the last
three chapters but incorporating some of the redox reactions that we
have just finished learning about. These are provided in problems 15.12
and 15.13 below.

As before, your job is to draw out a 'pathway diagram' for each
transformation, using the 'arrow in - arrow out' convention to indicate
the role of other necessary participants in each reaction, such as ATP,
NADH, water, or another organic molecule. An example for a simple
two-step pathway is provided in problem 15.12 below. A three-step
pathway would of course show *two* intermediate compounds.

Remember, it is most important that your proposed pathway be *chemically
reasonable* - in other words, each hypothetical reaction that you
propose should be very similar to a reaction pattern that we have seen
in chapters 8-15. You should be able to put a name on each step: for
example, 'step 1 is a Claisen condensation; step 2 is a ketone
reduction', and so forth.

Also remember that there is usually no one correct way to approach
problems like this - they are puzzles to solve, and success will be
dependent in large part on having

a solid grasp on the chemical 'tools' available to us: in other words,
the biochemical reaction types that we have been studying, starting with
nucleophilic substitutions in chapter 8.

**P15.12**: hypothetical 2-step transformations:

Each of the generalized transformations below would be expected to
require *two* enzymatic steps. Draw a reasonable pathway diagram for
each transformation.

***Example***:

<img src="media/image644.emf"
style="width:2.36111in;height:0.58333in" />

***Diagram***:

<img src="media/image645.emf"
style="width:4.52778in;height:0.69444in" />

*The first step is a nicotinamide-dependent ketone
reduction/hydrogenation, and step 2 is ATP-dependent phosphorylation
(ie. a kinase reaction). Note that the reducing agent in the first step
could also be NADPH)*

a\)

<img src="media/image646.emf"
style="width:3.62986in;height:0.61111in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image647.emf"
style="width:3.49097in;height:0.55556in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image648.emf"
style="width:4.86111in;height:0.60208in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image649.emf"
style="width:3.01875in;height:0.60208in" />

e\)

<img src="media/image650.emf"
style="width:4.35208in;height:0.61111in" />

f\)

<img src="media/image651.emf"
style="width:4.58333in;height:0.60208in" />

**P15.13**: hypothetical 3-step transformations:

Each of the generalized transformations below would be expected to
require three enzymatic steps. Draw a reasonable pathway diagram for
each transformation.

a\)

<img src="media/image652.emf"
style="width:4.24097in;height:0.94444in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image653.emf"
style="width:3.04653in;height:0.82431in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image654.emf"
style="width:4.11111in;height:0.79653in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image655.emf"
style="width:5.47222in;height:0.63889in" />

**P15.14**: Now, let's try our hand at predicting the steps of some
actual metabolic pathways. For each, draw a complete pathway diagram. As
needed, use any of the coenzymes we have studied, water, and ammonia.

***Note**: you will probably find these quite challenging! Do not expect
to be able to figure them out in a few minutes - rather, think of them
as puzzles to work on over a period of time, sharing ideas and
strategies with classmates. Remember, if one side of the transformation
is larger or more complex, start there and work towards the simpler
molecules. It is also a good idea, when applicable, to start the process
by a) counting carbons on each side of the transformation, and b)
identifying the key bond being formed (or broken) in the
transformation.*

a\)

<img src="media/image656.emf"
style="width:5.10208in;height:0.91667in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image657.emf"
style="width:3.41667in;height:1.16667in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image658.emf"
style="width:5.90764in;height:0.58333in" />

e\)

<img src="media/image659.emf"
style="width:4.43542in;height:1.87986in" />

f\)

<img src="media/image660.emf"
style="width:5.32431in;height:1.26875in" />

**P15.15:** Propose a pathway diagram for each of the metabolic pathways
below. Note that some pathways contain steps that will be unfamiliar to
you, and are therefore provided already.

a\) one cycle of fatty acid biosynthesis:

<img src="media/image661.emf" style="width:5.82431in;height:1in" />

b\) one cycle of fatty acid degradation:

<img src="media/image662.emf"
style="width:5.37986in;height:1.01875in" />

c\) Diabetics and people who adopt an extreme low-carbohydrate diet
sometimes have breath that smells like acetone, due to 'ketone body'
formation that occurs when acetyl-CoA from fatty acid oxidation (see
part (b) above) is not able to enter into the citric acid cycle. Draw a
pathway diagram showing how three molecules of excess acetyl CoA combine
to form acetone (all three acetyl-CoA molecules first link together, but
one is left over at the end of the process).

<img src="media/image663.emf"
style="width:4.66667in;height:0.87986in" />

d\) Pentose phosphate pathway (oxidative branch):

<img src="media/image664.emf"
style="width:4.57431in;height:1.32431in" />

e\) Citric acid (Krebs) cycle:

<img src="media/image665.emf" style="width:6in;height:3.93542in" />

f\) proline biosynthesis:

<img src="media/image666.emf"
style="width:3.68542in;height:1.19444in" />

g\) First half of lysine biosynthesis:

<img src="media/image667.emf"
style="width:5.24097in;height:0.99097in" />

h\) From the biosynthesis of membrane lipid in archaea: *J. Bacteriol.*
**2003**, *185*, 1181

<img src="media/image668.emf"
style="width:3.65764in;height:3.96319in" />

**Chapter 16**

**Free radical reactions**

<img src="media/image669.jpeg" style="width:6in;height:3.98819in" />

photo credit: https://www.flickr.com/photos/stevehopson/

**Introduction**

Imagine that you are an 18th century British sailor about set out with
Commodore George Anson to raid Spanish shipping fleets in the Pacific.
You know full well that you are signing up for a long and arduous
ordeal, with months of constant seasickness, bad food, cramped,
unsanitary conditions, and brutal warfare. You are mentally ready for
these hardships, but what you are not prepared for is to watch your own
body rot away – to literally fall apart.

Below is a description of the suffering endured by many sailors of the
time:

> Some lost their very substance and their legs became swollen and
> puffed up while the sinews contracted and turned coal-black and, in
> some cases, all blotched with drops of purplish blood. Then the
> disease would creep up to the hips, thighs and shoulders, arms and
> neck. And all the sick had their mouths so tainted and their gums so
> decayed that the flesh peeled off down to the roots of their teeth,
> which almost all fell out. . .

There were devastating neurological as well as physiological effects.
Scurvy had the ability to inhibit a person's normal restraints on
emotion: they became intensely homesick and nostalgic, wept at the
slightest disappointment, and screamed in agony upon smelling the scent
of flower blossoms drifting across the water from a nearby shore.

The disease afflicting the sailors was scurvy, which we now know is
caused by a deficiency of vitamin C in the diet. European sea voyagers
in the 18th century and earlier subsisted mainly on a diet of salted
meat, hard biscuits, pea soup, oatmeal, and beer. After the first couple
of weeks at sea, fresh fruits and vegetables - and the nutrients they
contained – were all consumed or spoiled. The salted meat and hardtack
diet provided salt and calories, but little else of nutritional value.

Although it is rare now, scurvy has plagued sailors for centuries, with
records of its occurrence on ships going back as far as the 15th century
voyages of Magellan and Vasco de Gama, both of whom lost up to three
quarters of their crew to the disease on long ocean crossings. Various
cultures made the connection between scurvy and diet, and learned
effective preventative measures: sailors with the 16th century French
explorer Jacques Cartier, for example, were cured of their scurvy upon
arriving in Canada and taking the advice of native people to eat the
leaves and bark of pine trees. These were lessons, unfortunately, that
often had to be relearned time and again, as the knowledge gained by one
culture was not effectively recorded and passed along to others.

Vitamin C, or ascorbic acid as it is known to chemists, plays an
essential helping role in a variety of essential biochemical reactions.
Most living things are able to synthesize ascorbic acid – the exceptions
include humans and other higher primates, several species of bats, and
some rodents such as guinea pigs and capybaras. Humans lack the last
enzyme in the ascorbic acid biosynthetic pathway, L-gulonolactone
oxidase. (EC 1.1.3.8) (You were invited to propose the mechanism for
this redox reaction in problem 15.10).

<img src="media/image670.emf"
style="width:4.99097in;height:3.27778in" />

fig 1a

Because we cannot make our own ascorbic acid, we need to get it in our
diet. It is abundant in many plant-based foods, citrus fruits in
particular. The traditional diet of the Inuit people of the arctic
region contains virtually no plant products, but vitamin C is obtained
from foods such as kelp, caribou livers, and whale skin. For a time in
the 18<sup>th</sup> century, the observation that citrus fruits quickly
cured scurvy led to the practice of including in a ship's stores a paste
prepared from boiled lemon juice. Unfortunately, ascorbic acid did not
survive the boiling process, rendering the paste ineffective against
scurvy. Captain James Cook, the legendary explorer and the first
European to make it to the east coast of Australia and the Hawaiian
islands, brought along sourkraut (fermented cabbage), a somewhat more
effective vitamin C supplement. According to his own account, Cook's
sailors at first refused to eat the pungent preparation, so the captain
engaged in a little psychological trickery: he declared that it would
only be served to officers. The enlisted sailors quickly took offense,
and demanded their own sourkraut ration. Later, the British navy
famously adopted the practice of adding lemon or lime juice to their
ships' rum rations, leading to the birth of the slang term 'Limey' used
by European and American sailors to refer to their British counterparts.

\*\*\*

The biochemical role of ascorbic acid is to facilitate the transfer of
*single electrons* in a variety of redox reactions - note here the
emphasis on *single* electrons, as opposed to the redox reactions we
studied in chapter 15 in which electrons were transferred in *pairs*.
The subject of this chapter is single-electron chemistry, and the free
radical intermediates that are involved in single electron reaction
steps.

Later in this chapter we will learn the chemical details of why ascorbic
acid deficiency causes scurvy, how the act of breathing makes you get
old, how polystyrene packing foam is made, and other interesting
applications of single-electron chemistry. But first we need to cover
some basics ideas about single electron chemical steps, and the free
radical intermediates that result from them.

**Section 16.1: Overview of single-electron reactions and free
radicals**

Beginning with acid-base reactions in chapter x and continuing though
the chapters on nucleophilic substitution, carbonyl addition, acyl
substitution, α-carbon chemistry, and electrophilic reactions , we have
been studying reaction mechanisms in which *both* electrons in a
covalent bond or lone pair move in the *same* direction. In this
chapter, we learn about reactions in which the key steps involve the
movement of *single* electrons. Single electron movement is depicted by
single-barbed **'fish-hook'** arrows (as opposed to the familiar
double-barbed arrows that we have been using throughout the book to show
two-electron movement).

<img src="media/image671.emf"
style="width:3.74097in;height:1.04653in" />

fig 1

Single-electron mechanisms involve the formation and subsequent reaction
of **free radical** species, highly unstable intermediates that contain
an unpaired electron. Free radicals are often formed from **homolytic
cleavage**, an event in which the two electrons in a breaking covalent
bond move in *opposite* directions. The bond in molecular chlorine, for
example, is subject to homolytic cleavage when chlorine is subjected to
heat or light. The result is two chlorine radicals. Note that each
radical has a formal charge of zero.

<img src="media/image672.emf"
style="width:3.21319in;height:1.36111in" />

fig 2

In contrast, essentially all of the reactions we have studied up to now
involve bond-breaking events in which both electrons move in the same
direction: this is called **heterolytic cleavage**.

<img src="media/image673.emf"
style="width:3.65764in;height:1.61111in" />

fig 3

Two other homolytic cleavage reactions that we will see in this chapter
can be described as 'radical hydrogen atom abstraction' and 'radical
alkene addition':

<img src="media/image674.emf"
style="width:4.25556in;height:2.75556in" />

fig 4

Single-electron reaction mechanisms involve the formation of radical
species, and in organic reactions these are often carbon radicals. A
carbon radical is *sp<sup>2</sup>* hybridized, with three σ bonds
arranged in trigonal planar geometry and the single unpaired electron
occupying an unhybridized *p* orbital. Contrast this picture with a
carbocation reactive intermediate, which is also *sp<sup>2</sup>*
hybridized with trigonal planar geometry but with an *empty* *p*
orbital.

<img src="media/image675.emf"
style="width:3.55556in;height:1.26875in" />

fig 5

When we studied electrophilic reactions in chapter 14, a major concern
when evaluating possible mechanisms was the stability of any carbocation
intermediate(s). Likewise, the stability of proposed radical
intermediates is of great importance when evaluating the likelihood of
possible single-electron mechanisms. Fortunately, the trend in the
stability of carbon radicals parallels that of carbocations (section
8.5): tertiary radicals, for example, are more stable than secondary
radicals, followed by primary and methyl radicals. This should make
intuitive sense, because radicals, like carbocations, are electron
deficient, and thus are stabilized by the electron-donating effects of
nearby alkyl groups.

<img src="media/image676.emf"
style="width:3.79653in;height:1.54653in" />

fig 6

Benzylic and allylic radicals are more stable than alkyl radicals due to
resonance effects - an unpaired electron (just like a positive or
negative charge) can be delocalized over a system of conjugated π bonds.
An allylic radical, for example, can be pictured as a system of three
parallel *p* orbitals sharing three electrons.

<img src="media/image677.emf"
style="width:1.80556in;height:0.97222in" />

fig 7

The drawing below shows how a benzylic radical is delocalized to three
additional carbons around the aromatic ring:

<img src="media/image678.emf"
style="width:5.35208in;height:2.38889in" />

fig 8

<u>Exercise 16.1</u>: Just as phenolate ions are less reactive (less
basic) than alkoxide ions, phenolic radicals are less reactive than
alkoxide radicals. Draw one resonance contributor of a phenolic radical
showing how the radical electron is delocalized to a ring carbon.
Include electron-movement arrows.

> <img src="media/image679.emf"
> style="width:0.76875in;height:0.61111in" />

While radical species are almost always very reactive and short-lived,
in some extreme cases they can be unreactive. One example of an inert
organic radical structure is shown below.

<img src="media/image680.emf"
style="width:2.11111in;height:1.99097in" />

fig 10

The already extensive benzylic resonance stabilization is further
enhanced by the fact that the large electron clouds on the chlorine
atoms shield the radical center from external reagents. The radical is,
in some sense, inside a protective 'cage'.

<u>Exercise 16.2</u>: Draw a resonance contributor of the structure
above in which the unpaired electron is formally located on a chlorine
atom (include electron movement arrows)

**Section 16.2: Radical chain reactions**

Because of their high reactivity, free radicals have the potential to be
extremely powerful chemical tools - but as we will see in this chapter,
they can also be extremely harmful in a biological/environmental
context. Key to understanding many types of radical reactions is the
idea of a **radical chain reaction**.

Radical chain reactions have three distinct phases: initiation,
propagation, and termination. We'll use a well-known example, the
halogenation of an alkane such as ethane, to illustrate. The overall
reaction is:

<img src="media/image681.emf"
style="width:3.16667in;height:0.72222in" />

fig 11

The **initiation** phase in a radical chain reaction involves the
homolytic cleavage of a weak single bond in a non-radical compound,
resulting in two radical species as products.

Often, heat or light provides the energy necessary to overcome an energy
barrier for this type of event. The initiation step in alkane
halogenation is homolysis of molecular chlorine (Cl<sub>2</sub>) into
two chlorine radicals. Keep in mind that that virtually all radical
species, chlorine radicals included, are highly reactive.

<img src="media/image682.emf" style="width:1.44444in;height:0.25in" />

fig12

The **propagation** phase is the 'chain' part of chain reactions.

<img src="media/image683.emf"
style="width:4.94444in;height:2.58333in" />

fig 13

Once a reactive free radical (chlorine radical in our example) is
generated in the initiation phase, it will react with relatively stable,
non-radical compounds to form a new radical species. In ethane
halogenation, a chlorine radical generated in the initiation step first
reacts with ethane in a hydrogen abstraction step, generating HCl and an
ethyl radical (part a above). Then, the ethyl radical reacts with
another (non-radical) Cl<sub>2</sub> molecule, forming the chloroethane
product and regenerating a chlorine radical (part b above). This process
repeats itself again and again, as chlorine radicals formed in part (b)
react with additional ethane molecules as in part (a).

The **termination** phase is a **radical combination** step, where two
radical species happen to collide and react with each other to form a
non-radical product and 'break the chain'. In our ethane chlorination
example, one possible termination event is the reaction of a chlorine
radical with an ethyl radical to form chloroethane.

<img src="media/image684.emf"
style="width:3.33333in;height:0.66667in" />

fig 14

<u>Exercise 16.3</u>: Draw two alternative chain termination steps in
the ethane chlorination chain reaction. Which one leads to an undesired
product?

Because radical species are so reactive and short-lived, their
concentration in the reaction mixture at any given time is very low
compared to the non-radical components such as ethane and
Cl<sub>2</sub>. Thus, many cycles of the chain typically occur before a
termination event takes place. In other words, a single initiation event
leads to the formation of many product molecules.

Compounds which readily undergo homolytic cleavage to generate radicals
are called **radical initiators**. As we have just seen, molecular
chlorine and bromine will readily undergo homolytic cleavage to form
radicals when subjected to heat or light. Other commonly used as radical
initiators are peroxides and *N*-bromosuccinimide (NBS).

<img src="media/image685.emf"
style="width:4.24097in;height:2.16667in" />

fig 15

**Section 16.3: Useful polymers formed by radical chain reactions**

Many familiar household materials polymers made from radical chain
reaction processes. Polyethylene (PET), the plastic material used to
make soft drink bottles and many other kinds of packaging, is produced
by the radical polymerization of ethylene (ethylene is a common name for
what we call 'ethene' in IUPAC nomenclature). The process begins when a
radical initiator such as benzoyl peroxide undergoes homolytic cleavage
at high temperature:

<img src="media/image686.emf"
style="width:4.71319in;height:1.47222in" />

fig 16

In the propagation phase, the benzoyl radical (X• in the figure below)
adds to the double bond of ethylene, generating a new organic radical.

<img src="media/image687.emf" style="width:6in;height:5.18948in" />

fig 17

Successive ethylene molecules add to the growing polymer, until
termination occurs when two radicals happen to collide.

<img src="media/image688.emf"
style="width:4.87986in;height:1.82431in" />

fig 18

The length of the polymer is governed by how long the propagation phase
continues before termination, and can usually be controlled by adjusting
reaction conditions.

Other small substituted alkene monomers polymerize in a similar fashion
to form familiar polymer materials. Two examples are given below.

<img src="media/image689.emf"
style="width:3.40764in;height:2.61111in" />

fig 19

<u>Exercise 16.4:</u> Show a mechanism for the formation of a 2-unit
long section of polystyrene, starting with the monomer and benzoyl
peroxide initiator. Keep in mind the relative stability of different
radical intermediates.

A common way to separate proteins in the biochemistry lab is through a
technique called polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). The
polyacrylamide gel is formed through radical polymerization of
acrylamide monomer, with the ammonium salt of persulfate used as the
radical initiator.

<img src="media/image690.emf"
style="width:5.95556in;height:3.34444in" />

fig 20

In the end of chapter problems, you will be invited to propose a
mechanism showing how a molecule called '*bis*-acrylamide' serves as a
'crosslinker' between linear polyacrylamide chains to allow for
formation of a net-like structure for the PAGE gel.

**Section 16.4: Destruction of the ozone layer by a radical chain
reaction**

The high reactivity of free radicals and the multiplicative nature of
radical chain reactions can be useful in the synthesis of materials such
as polyethylene plastic - but these same factors can also result in
dangerous consequences in a biological or ecological context. You are
probably aware of the danger posed to the earth's protective
stratospheric ozone layer by the use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) as
refrigerants and propellants in aerosol spray cans. Freon-11, or
CFCl<sub>3</sub>, is a typical CFC that was widely used until late in
the 20th century. It can take months or years for a CFC molecule to
drift up into the stratosphere from the surface of the earth, and of
course the concentration of CFCs at this altitude is very low. Ozone, on
the other hand, is continually being formed in the stratosphere. Why all
the concern, then, about destruction of the ozone layer - how could such
a small amount of CFCs possibly do significant damage? The problem lies
in the fact that the process by which ozone is destroyed is a *chain*
reaction, so that a single CFC molecule can initiate the destruction of
many ozone molecules before a chain termination event occurs.

Although there are several different processes by which the ozone
destruction process might occur, the most important is believed to be
the chain reaction shown below.

<img src="media/image691.emf"
style="width:4.83333in;height:3.15764in" />

fig 21

First, a CFC molecule undergoes homolytic cleavage upon exposure to UV
radiation, resulting in the formation of two radicals (step 1). The
chlorine radical rapidly reacts with ozone (step 2) to form molecular
oxygen and a chlorine monoxide radical. Step 3 *appears* to be a chain
termination step, as two chlorine monoxide radicals combine. The
Cl<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> condensation product, however, is highly
reactive and undergoes two successive homolytic cleavage events (steps 4
and 5) to form O<sub>2</sub> and two chlorine radicals, which propagates
the chain.

To address the problem of ozone destruction, materials chemists have
developed new hydrofluorocarbon refrigerant compounds. The newer
compounds contain carbon-hydrogen bonds, which are weaker than the
carbon-halogen bonds in CFCs , and thus are susceptible to homolytic
cleavage caused by small amounts of hydroxide radical present in the
lower atmosphere:

<img src="media/image692.emf"
style="width:2.43542in;height:0.72222in" />

fig 22

This degradation occurs *before* the refrigerant molecules have a chance
to drift higher up to the stratosphere where the ozone plays its
important protective role. The degradation products are quite unstable
and quickly degrade further into relatively harmless by-products. The
hydroxide radical is sometimes referred to as an atmospheric 'detergent'
due to its ability to degrade escaped refrigerants and other volatile
organic pollutants.

Hydrofluorocarbons do, however, act as greenhouse gases, and are thought
to contribute to climate change.

**Section 16.5: Oxidative damage, vitamin C, and scurvy**

While the hydroxide radical can be a beneficial 'detergent' in the
atmosphere, it is harmful when present in a living cell. Hydroxide
radical is one of the reactive oxygen species (ROS) that we learned
about in chapter 15. Recall that ROS are continuously produced as minor
but harmful side-products in the reduction of O<sub>2</sub> to
H<sub>2</sub>O in respiration.

You may recall from your general chemistry course that molecular oxygen
exists in two states: 'singlet' oxygen has a double bond and no unpaired
electrons, while 'triplet' oxygen has a single O-O bond and two unpaired
electrons. Molecular orbital theory - and experimental evidence - show
that the triplet state is lower in energy.

<img src="media/image693.emf"
style="width:2.32431in;height:0.68542in" />

fig 23

ROS are highly reactive oxidizing agents, capable of inflicting damage
to DNA, proteins, and the lipids of cell membranes - they are thought to
play a major role in the aging process. Hydroxide radical, for example,
can initiate a radical chain reaction with the hydrocarbon chain of an
unsaturated membrane lipid molecule, resulting in the formation of lipid
hydroperoxide.

<img src="media/image694.emf"
style="width:5.76875in;height:3.30556in" />

fig 24

The allylic lipid radical formed as the result of homolytic hydrogen
abstraction by hydroxide radical (step 1 above) reacts with one of the
unpaired electrons in triplet oxygen (step 2) forming a peroxy radical.
This radical species in turn homolytically abstracts a hydrogen from
another lipid molecule (step 3), thus propagating the chain.

Many edible plants contain various antioxidant compounds, also known as
'free radical scavengers', which serve to protect cells from the
oxidative effects of hydroxide radical and other harmful radical
intermediates. Simply put, a free radical scavenger is a molecule that
reacts with a potentially damaging free radical species, forming a *more
stable* radical species which can be metabolized by the body before any
damage is done to cell constituents.

<img src="media/image695.emf"
style="width:3.65764in;height:1.34236in" />

In the introduction to this chapter, we learned about scurvy, the
disease long dreaded by sailors, and how it is caused by a deficiency of
ascorbic acid (vitamin C) in the diet. We will soon get to the
connection between ascorbic acid and scurvy, but first, let's look at
how ascorbic acid functions as a free radical scavenger in your body.

The pKa of ascorbic acid is about 4.1, so in a physiological environment
it exists mainly as ascorbate anion, the conjugate base. When ascorbate
encounters a hydroxide radical (or any other potentially damaging
radical species), it donates a single electron, thus reducing the
hydroxide radical to hydroxide ion and becoming itself an ascorbyl
radical.

<img src="media/image696.emf"
style="width:5.62986in;height:1.87986in" />

fig 24a

The ascorbyl radical is stabilized by resonance. The end result of this
first step is that a very reactive, potentially harmful hydroxide
radical has been 'quenched' to hydroxide ion and replaced by a much less
reactive (and thus less harmful) ascorbyl radical.

The ascorbyl radical can then donate a second electron to quench a
second hydroxide radical, resulting in the formation of
dehydroascorbate, the oxidized form of ascorbate.

<img src="media/image697.emf"
style="width:4.77778in;height:1.27778in" />

fig 24b

One ascorbate molecule is thus potentially able to scavenge *two*
harmful radical species.

Dehydroascorbate is subsequently either broken down and excreted, or
else enzymatically recycled (reduced) back to ascorbic acid. You were
invited to propose a mechanism for the latter (redox) step in problem
15.10. *J. Am. Coll. Nutr.*, **2003**, *22*, 18

We learned in the introduction to this chapter about the gruesome
effects of long-term ascorbic acid deficiency. What, then, is the
chemical connection between ascorbic acid and scurvy?

The symptoms association with scurvy are caused by the body's failure to
properly synthesize collagen, the primary structural protein in our
connective tissues. Essential to the stability of collagen is its
ability to form a unique triple-helical structure, in which three
protein strands coil around each other like a woven rope. Collagen
strands are not able to pack together properly into their triple helix
structure unless certain of their proline amino acid residues are
hydroxylated: the electronegative OH group on hydroxyproline causes the
five-membered ring in the amino acid to favor a particular 'envelope'
conformation (section 3.2) as well as the *'trans'* peptide
conformation, both of which are necessary for stable triple-helix
formation.

<img src="media/image698.emf"
style="width:3.22222in;height:1.63889in" />

<img src="media/image699.emf"
style="width:4.57431in;height:1.66667in" />

<img src="media/image700.emf"
style="width:4.79653in;height:1.72222in" />

fig 26a

Proline hydroxylase, the enzyme responsible for this key modification
reaction, depends in turn upon the presence of ascorbate. The
hydroxylating reaction is complex, and involves electron-transfer steps
with enzyme-bound iron - mechanistic details that are well outside of
our scope here, but which you may learn about in a bioinorganic
chemistry course. It is enough for us to know that iron starts out in
the Fe<sup>+2</sup> state, and during the course of the reaction it
loses an electron to assume the Fe<sup>+3</sup> state. In order for the
enzyme to catalyze another reaction, the iron must be reduced back to
its active Fe<sup>+2</sup> state - it must accept a single electron. The
donor of this single electron is ascorbate.

*(*For more information, see *Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol.* **2010**,
*405*, 106.)

So, to sum up: If we fail to get enough ascorbic acid in our diet (in
other words, if we don't eat our fruits and vegetables!) the iron in our
proline hydroxylase enzymes won't be returned to the active
Fe<sup>+2</sup> state, so the catalytic cycle is broken and we can't
turn prolines into hydroxyprolines. Without the hydroxy group, the
proline residues of our collagen proteins won't assume the proper
conformation, and as a consequence the collagen triple helix structures
will be unstable. At physiological temperature, our collagen will
literally melt apart - and with it, our gums, our capillaries, and
anything else held together by connective tissue. This is scurvy.

You have probably heard that many fruits and vegetables contain natural
'polyphenol' antioxidant compounds that are thought to be beneficial to
our health. Apigenin, for example, is found in parsley and celery, while
the skins of grapes used to produce red wine are particularly rich in
resveratrol, as well as many other polyphenols. Curcumin is the compound
responsible for the distinctive yellow color of turmeric, a ubiquitous
spice in Indian cuisine.

<img src="media/image701.emf"
style="width:4.99097in;height:3.36111in" />

fig 25

While much remains to be learned about exactly how these polyphenols
exert their antioxidant effects, it is likely that they, like ascorbic
acid, act as radical scavengers. For example, resveratrol could donate a
single electron (and a proton) to hydroxide radical to reduce it to
water. The phenolic radical that results is stabilized by resonance, and
is much less likely than hydroxide radical to cause damage to important
biomolecules in the cell.

<img src="media/image702.emf"
style="width:5.99097in;height:1.54653in" />

fig 26

**Section 16.6: Flavin as a a single-electron carrier**

In chapter 15 we saw how a nicotinamide and flavin coenzymes can act as
acceptors or donors of *two* electrons in hydride-transfer redox steps.
Recall that it was mentioned that flavin, (but *not* nicotinamide) can
also participate in *single-electron* transfer steps through a
stabilized radical intermediate called a **semiquinone.**. Frey p. 162
fig 3-30; Silverman p. 122 sch. 3.34; J Phys Chem A. 2013, 117, 11136
fig 2)

<img src="media/image703.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.98612in" />

fig 27

Note in this reaction that overall, flavin loses or gains two electrons
and two protons, just like in the flavin-dependent redox reactions we
saw in chapter 15. The difference here is that the electrons are
transferred *one at a* *time*, rather than paired in the form of a
hydride ion.

Two important examples single-electron acceptor species in human
metabolism are ubiquinone (coenzyme Q) and the oxidized form of
cytochrome. Ubiquinone is a coenzyme that can transfer single electrons
via a semiquinone state analogous to that of flavin, and cytochrome is a
protein containing a 'heme' iron center which shuttles between the
Fe<sup>+3</sup> (oxidized) and Fe<sup>+2</sup> (reduced) state.

<img src="media/image704.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.73859in" />

fig 27a

Further discussion of the mechanisms of single-electron flavin reactions
is beyond our scope here, but when you study the 'respiratory chain' in
a biochemistry course you will gain a deeper appreciation for the
importance of flavin in single-electron transfer processes.

**Problems**

**P16.1:** Plexiglass is a polymer of methyl methacrylate. Show a
mechanism for the first two propagation steps of polymerization (use X•
to denote the radical initiator), and show a structure for the
plexiglass polymer. Assume an alkene addition process similar to that
shown in the text for polyethylene.

> <img src="media/image705.emf"
> style="width:1.21319in;height:1.08333in" />

**P16.2:** In section 16.3 we saw how acrylamide polymerizes to form the
polyacrylamide used in PAGE protein gels. Polyacrylamide by itself is
not sufficient by itself to form the gel - the long polyacrylamide
chains simply slip against each other, like boiled spaghetti. To make a
PAGE gel, with pores for the proteins to slip through, we need a
crosslinker - something to tie the chains together, forming a
three-dimensional web-like structure. Usually, a small amount of
*bis*-acrylamide is added to the acrylamide in the polymerization
mixture for this purpose.

<img src="media/image706.emf"
style="width:1.71319in;height:1.08333in" />

Propose a radical mechanism showing how *bis*- acrylamide might form
crosslinks between two polyacrylamide chains.

**P16.3:** Resveratrol is a natural antioxidant found in red wine (see
section 16.5 for the structure).

a\) Draw one resonance structure to illustrate how the resveratrol
radical is delocalized by resonance.

b\) Indicate all of the carbons on your structure to which the radical
can be delocalized.

c\) Draw an alternate resveratrol radical (one in which a hydrogen atom
from one of the other two phenolic groups has been abstracted). To how
many carbons can this radical be delocalized?

d\) The curcumin structure is shown in the same figure as that of
resveratrol, in section16.5. Draw two resonance contributors of a
curcumin radical, one in which the unpaired electron is on a phenolic
oxygen, and one in which the unpaired electron is on a ketone oxygen.

**P16.4:** Draw the radical intermediate species that you would expect
to form when each of the compounds below reacts with a radical
initiator.

<img src="media/image707.emf"
style="width:4.21319in;height:2.18542in" />

**P16.5:** Azobis(isobutyronitrile) is a widely used radical initiator
which rapidly undergoes homolytic decomposition when heated.

<img src="media/image708.emf" style="width:1.66667in;height:1in" />

Predict the products of this decomposition reaction, and show a likely
mechanism. What is the thermodynamic driving force for homolytic
cleavage?

**P16.6:**

a\) When 2-methylbutane is subjected to chlorine gas and heat, a number
of isomeric chloroalkanes with the formula C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>11</sub>Cl
can form. Draw structures for these isomers, and for each draw the alkyl
radical intermediate that led to its formation.

b\) In part a), which is the most stable radical intermediate?

c\) In the reaction in part a), the relative abundance of different
isomers in the product is not *exclusively* a reflection of the relative
stability of radical intermediates. Explain.

**P16.7:** We learned in chapter 14 that HBr will react with alkenes in
electrophilic addition reactions with 'Markovnikov' regioselectivity.
However, when the starting alkene contains even a small amount of
contaminating peroxide (which happens when it is allowed to come into
contact with air), a significant amount of 'anti-Markovnikov' product is
often observed.

a\) Propose a mechanism for formation of the anti-Markovnikov addition
product when 1-butene reacts with HBr containing a small amount of
benzoyl peroxide

b\) Predict the product and propose a mechanism for the addition of
ethanethiol to 1-butene in the presence of peroxide.

**P16.8:** In section 11.5 we learned that aspirin works by blocking the
action of an enzyme that catalyzes a key step in the biosynthesis of
prostaglandins, a class of biochemical signaling molecules. The enzyme
in question, prostaglandin H synthase (EC 1.14.99.1) catalyzes the
reaction *via* several single-electron steps. First, an iron-bound
oxygen radical in the enzyme abstracts a hydrogen atom from
arachidonate. The arachidonate radical intermediate then reacts with
molecular oxygen to form a five-membered oxygen-containing ring,
followed by closure of a cyclopentane ring to yield yet another radical
intermediate. (*Biochemistry* **2002**, *41*, 15451.)

<img src="media/image709.emf"
style="width:5.27778in;height:2.52778in" />

Propose a mechanism for the steps of the reaction that are shown in this
figure.

**P16.9:** Some redox enzymes use copper to assist in electron transfer
steps. One important example is dopamine β-monooxygenase (EC 1.14.1.1),
which catalyzes the following reaction:

<img src="media/image710.emf"
style="width:4.99097in;height:1.07431in" />

The following intermediates have been proposed: (see *Biochemistry*
**1994**, *33*, 226) Silverman p. 222

<img src="media/image711.emf"
style="width:5.27778in;height:4.26875in" />

Draw mechanistic arrows for steps 1-4.

**Chapter 17**

**Coenzymes**

<img src="media/image712.jpeg" style="width:3.31722in;height:5.14815in"
alt="ttps://legionmagazine.com/en/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/VEDayInset8.jpg" />

Photo: Taconis Kryn, Library and Archives Canada - PA169941

The old black and white photograph is haunting. A young boy, perhaps 10
or 11 years old, huddles against a wall outside a soup kitchen, his
mouth in an odd twisted shape that could be expressing either pain or
defiance, his eyes staring straight into those of the viewer. Tucked
into his pants, almost like a pistol in a holster, is a metal spoon.

The photograph was taken in the Netherlands in 1945, at the height of
what the Dutch people still refer to simply as "The Hunger Winter". With
the western part of the country still occupied by the Nazis, the Dutch
resistance government, based in London, had called for a railway strike
with the aim of stopping German troop movements before a planned
airborne invasion by Allied forces. In retaliation, the Germans cut off
all food shipments to cities in the western Netherlands. The Allied
invasion failed to liberate the country, and the winter of 1944-1945
turned out to be bitterly cold. With food supplies dwindling, rations
were cut first to 1000 calories per day, then to 500. People resorted to
eating grass and tulip bulbs just to stay alive. Over 20,000 people died
of starvation before food shipments were restored in the spring.

As tragic as the Hunger Winter was for the Dutch people, some good did
come from it. For medical scientists, the event became a unique 'social
experiment': unlike most episodes of famine throughout human history,
the Hunger Winter had a clearly defined beginning, end, and geographic
boundary, and it occurred in a technologically advanced society that
continued to keep thorough records before, during, and after the ordeal.
Scientists knew exactly who suffered from famine and for precisely how
long, and in the years that followed they were able to look at the
long-term effects of famine, particularly on developing embryos.
Researchers found that babies who had been conceived during the famine
were born with a significantly higher incidence of neurological birth
defects such as spina bifida, a condition in which a portion of the
neural tube protrudes from between vertebrae which did not properly fuse
together during fetal development. Later in life, members of this same
cohort of 'famine babies' were more likely to be obese, and to suffer
from schizophrenia.

These initial findings spurred interest in further research into the
consequences of prenatal deprivation. In particular, carefully
controlled studies later led to the recognition of the importance of the
vitamin folate in ensuring proper neurological development in early-term
fetuses.

<img src="media/image713.emf"
style="width:3.55556in;height:1.77778in" />

fig 1a

Folate - the conjugate base of folic acid - is an organic **coenzyme**:
a helper molecule that binds in the active site of certain enzymes and
plays a critical role in the biochemical reaction being catalyzed.
Recall that we have seen coenzymes at work before: SAM, ATP,
NAD(P)<sup>+</sup> and NAD(P)H, flavin and glutathione are all important
coenzymes with which we are already familiar.

Because prenatal folate deficiency was found to be directly related to
the incidence of spina bifida and other neural tube defects, health
officials in the United States and many other countries changed their
official guidelines to include a specific recommendation that women
begin taking folate supplements as soon as they knew that they are
pregnant, or better yet as soon as they begin trying to become pregnant.
A number of studies conducted during the 1980s and early 1990s
consistently showed that folate supplementation correlated with a 50-70%
reduction in neural tube defects.

The molecular role of folate in prenatal neurological development is not
understood in detail, but most researchers agree that it probably has a
lot to do with DNA biosynthesis. Like *S-*adenosyl methionine (SAM),
folate functions in 1-carbon transfer reactions, including several
critical steps in the nucleic acid biosynthesis pathways. The rapidly
dividing cells of the developing brain of an early term fetus appear to
be especially sensitive to folate deficiency in the mother's diet:
insufficient folate leads to impaired DNA biosynthesis, which in turn
leads to defects in brain development.

Folate also serves as a 1-carbon donor in the pathway by which SAM is
regenerated after it donates a methyl group. You may recall from the
introduction to chapter 8 that methylation of cytosine bases in DNA by
SAM results in permanent changes to a individual's genome - this was the
reason why the two 'identical' twin sisters in that introductory story
turned out to be, as they grew older, not so identical after all. It is
likely that the folate deprivation that afflicted expectant mothers
during the Dutch Hunger Winter also caused epigenetic changes (in other
words, changes in the extent of DNA methylation) in their developing
fetuses, which decades later manifested in the form of an increased
incidence of conditions such as obesity and schizophrenia. All the more
reason, we now know, to make sure that women get plenty of folate in
their diet early in the first trimester of pregnancy.

In this final chapter, we focus on the organic chemistry of folate,
along with three other coenzymes: pyridoxal phosphate, thiamine
diphosphate, and lipoamide. Humans can synthesize lipoamide, but we
depend on dietary sources for the other three: pyridoxal phosphate is a
form of vitamin B<sub>6</sub>, and thiamine diphosphate is a form of
vitamin B<sub>1.</sub> In a mechanistic sense, there is really nothing
new in this chapter. All of the reaction mechanism types that we will
see are already familiar to us, ranging from nucleophilic substitutions
(chapter 8) to disulfide exchanges (chapter 15). We will soon see,
however, how each coenzyme plays its own specific and crucial role in
assisting enzymes with the catalysis of key reactions of metabolism. We
will begin with pyridoxal phosphate and its various roles in amino acid
metabolism.

<u>Additional reading:</u>

http://www.naturalhistorymag.com/features/142195/beyond-dna-epigenetics

**Section 17.1: Pyridoxal phosphate (Vitamin B<sub>6</sub>)**

The coenzyme pyridoxal phosphate (commonly abbreviated PLP) is the
active form of vitamin B<sub>6</sub>, or pyridoxine.

<img src="media/image714.emf"
style="width:4.07431in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 1

PLP is required for over 100 different reactions in human metabolism,
primarily in the various amino acid biosynthetic and degradation
pathways. The essential function of PLP is to act as an 'electron sink',
stabilizing a negative formal charge that develops on key reaction
intermediates. Some of reactions will be familiar to you from chapter 12
and 13: we will see examples, for instance, of PLP-dependent α-carbon
racemization, as well as aldol- and Claisen-type reactions. Other
reactions will be less familiar: for example, the participation of PLP
allows for decarboxylation of amino acids, a chemical step which would
be highly unlikely without the coenzyme, and PLP is also required for a
very important class of biochemical transformation called
'transamination', in which the amino group of an amino acid is
transferred to an acceptor molecule. Before we dive into the reactions
themselves, though, we need to begin by looking at a key preliminary
step that is common to all of the PLP reactions we will see in this
section.

<u>17.1A: PLP in the active site: the imine linkage</u>

The common catalytic cycle of a PLP-dependent enzyme begins and ends
with the coenzyme *covalently* linked to the enzyme's active site
through an imine linkage between the aldehyde carbon of PLP and the
amine group of a lysine residue (see section 10.5 to review the
mechanism for imine formation). For a PLP-dependent enzyme to become
active, a PLP molecule must first enter the active site of an enzyme and
form an imine link to the lysine. This state is often referred to as an
**external aldimine**.

<img src="media/image715.emf"
style="width:4.86111in;height:2.86111in" />

fig 2

The first step of virtually all PLP-dependent reactions is
transimination (section 10.5), as the amino group on the amino acid
substrate displaces the amino group of the enzymatic lysine. This
state - where the coenzyme is covalently linked to the substrate or
product of the reaction - is often referred to as an **internal
aldimine**.

<img src="media/image716.emf"
style="width:5.08333in;height:2.74097in" />

fig 3

With the preliminary transimination accomplished, the real PLP chemistry
is ready to start. The versatility of PLP in terms of its ability to
assist with a wide variety of reaction types is illustrated by the
figure below, showing how, depending upon the reaction/enzyme in
question, PLP can assist in the cleavage of any one of the four bonds to
the α-carbon of the amino acid substrate.

<img src="media/image717.emf"
style="width:3.40764in;height:2.24097in" />

fig 4

Let's look first at the reaction catalyzed by PLP-dependent alanine
racemase. (EC 5.1.1.1).

<u>17.1B: PLP-dependent amino acid racemization</u>

In section 12.2B we saw an example of a PLP-*independent* amino acid
racemization reaction, in which the negatively-charged intermediate was
simply the enolate form of a carboxylate:

<img src="media/image718.emf"
style="width:5.29653in;height:1.08333in" />

fig 5

Many other amino acid racemase reactions, however, require the
participation of PLP.

Like all other PLP-dependent reactions that we will see in this section,
PLP-dependent amino acid racemization begins with a preliminary step in
which the substrate becomes attached to the coenzyme through a
transimination. Once it is linked to PLP in the active site, the
α-proton of an amino acid substrate is abstracted by an active site base
(step 1 below). The negative charge on the carbanion intermediate can,
of course, be delocalized to the carboxylate group. The PLP coenzyme,
however, provides an expanded network of conjugated π-bonds over which
the electron density can be delocalized all the way down to the PLP
nitrogen. This is what we mean when we say that the job of PLP is to act
as an ‘**electron sink**’: the coenzyme is very efficient at absorbing,
or delocalizing, the excess electron density on the deprotonated
α-carbon of the reaction intermediate. *PLP is helping the enzyme to
increase the acidity of the α-hydrogen by stabilizing the conjugate
base*. A PLP-stabilized carbanion intermediate is commonly referred to
as a **quinonoid intermediate**. Note that in the overall reaction
equation below, PLP appears below the reaction arrow in brackets,
indicating that it participates in the mechanism but is regenerated as
part of the reaction cycle.

PLP-dependent amino acid racemization:

<img src="media/image719.emf"
style="width:3.26875in;height:1.69444in" />

Mechanism:

<u>Preliminary step - transimination:</u>

<img src="media/image720.emf"
style="width:5.08333in;height:2.74097in" />

<u>First step - deprotonation:</u>

<img src="media/image721.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.58333in" />

Second step - reprotonation from the opposite side:

<img src="media/image722.emf"
style="width:3.63889in;height:2.32431in" />

<u>Final step - transimination:</u>

<img src="media/image723.emf"
style="width:4.82431in;height:2.38889in" />

fig 7

fig 6 fig 6a

Just as in the PLP-independent racemase reactions, reprotonation occurs
on the *opposite* side of the substrate (step 2), leading to the D-amino
acid product.

All that remains is the final imine exchange which frees the D-amino
acid product and re-attaches the coenzyme to the enzymatic lysine
side-chain, ready to begin another catalytic cycle.

*To simplify matters, from here on we will not include the preliminary
and final transimination steps in our PLP reaction figures - we will
only show mechanistic steps that occur while the substrate is attached
to the coenzyme (the internal aldimine forms).*

<u>17.1C: PLP-dependent decarboxylation</u>

In the amino acid racemase reaction above, PLP assisted in breaking the
α-carbon to α-proton bond of the amino acid. Other PLP-dependent enzymes
can catalyze the breaking of the bond between the α-carbon and the
carboxylate carbon by stabilizing the resulting carbanion intermediate:
these are simply decarboxylation reactions.

PLP-depended amino acid decarboxylation:

<img src="media/image724.emf"
style="width:2.44444in;height:0.88889in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image725.emf"
style="width:5.97222in;height:5.52778in" />

fig 8 fig 9

Notice something very important here: while in racemization reactions
the assistance of PLP can be seen as 'optional' (in the sense that some
racemase enzyme use PLP and others do not), the coenzyme is *essential*
for amino acid decarboxylation steps. Without PLP, there is no way to
stabilize the carbanion intermediate, and decarboxylation is not a
chemically reasonable step.

<img src="media/image726.emf"
style="width:2.77778in;height:1.02778in" />

fig 10

One example of a PLP-facilitated decarboxylation reaction is the final
step in the lysine biosynthesis pathway: (EC 4.1.1.20).

<img src="media/image727.emf"
style="width:4.54653in;height:1.24097in" />

fig 11

Exercise 17.1: Draw mechanistic arrows for the carbon-carbon
bond-breaking step of the PLP-dependent decarboxylation reaction above.

<u>17.1D: PLP-dependent retroaldol and retro-Claisen cleavage</u>

*(It would be a good idea before reading this section to review
aldol/retro-aldol and Claisen/retro-Claisen reaction mechanisms in
sections 12.3 and 13.3, respectively)*

So far we have seen PLP playing a role in breaking the bond between the
α-carbon and its α-proton (in the racemization reaction), and the bond
between the α-carbon and carboxylate carbon (in the decarboxylation
reaction).

<img src="media/image717.emf"
style="width:3.40764in;height:2.24097in" />

fig 4

Other PLP-dependent enzymes catalyze cleavage of the bond between the
α-carbon and the first carbon on the amino acid side chain, otherwise
known as the β-carbon. In the serine degradation pathway, serine is
first converted to glycine by a retro-aldol cleavage reaction. Although
a reasonable mechanism could be proposed without the participation of
PLP, this reaction in fact requires the coenzyme to assist in
stabilization of the negative charge on the carbanion intermediate.

A PLP-dependent retro-aldol cleavage reaction

(serine hydroxymethyl transferase, EC 2.1.2.1)

<img src="media/image728.emf"
style="width:4.37986in;height:1.44444in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image729.emf"
style="width:5.21319in;height:2.58333in" />

fig 12 fig 13

Note that, in this reaction just as in the racemase reaction described
previously, the key intermediate is a PLP-stabilized carbanion, or
quinonoid.

What happens to the (toxic!) formaldehyde produced in this reaction? We
will see later in this chapter how the serine hydroxymethyltransferase
enzyme goes on to use another coenzyme called tetrahydrofolate to
prevent the formaldehyde from leaving the active site and causing damage
to the cell.

PLP also assists in retro-Claisen cleavage reactions (section 13.3C),
such as this step in the degradation of threonine. (EC 2.3.1.29)

A PLP-dependent retro-Claisen reaction:

<img src="media/image730.emf"
style="width:3.90764in;height:1.13889in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image731.emf"
style="width:5.74097in;height:5.43542in" />

fig 14 fig 15

Notice how, like the retro-aldol reaction, the bond between the α-carbon
and the β-carbon of the amino acid substrate is broken (in step 1b).

<u>17.1-E: PLP-dependent transamination</u>

One of the most important reaction types in amino acid metabolism is
**transamination**, in which an amino group on a donor molecule (often
an amino acid) is transferred to a ketone or aldehyde acceptor molecule.

A transamination reaction:

<img src="media/image732.emf"
style="width:5.61111in;height:0.99097in" />

Transamination phase 1 (transfer of amino group from amino acid
substrate to coenzyme)

<img src="media/image733.emf"
style="width:4.88889in;height:2.07431in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image734.emf"
style="width:5.08333in;height:4.33333in" />

fig 16 fig 17 fig17a

Once again, step 1 is abstraction of the α-proton from the PLP-substrate
adduct. However, in a transaminase reaction this initial deprotonation
step is immediately followed by reprotonation at what was originally the
aldehyde carbon of PLP (step 2 above), which results in a new
carbon-nitrogen double bond (in other words, an imine) between the
α-carbon and the nitrogen atom of the original amino acid. The
repositioned imine group is then hydrolyzed (step 3 above), breaking the
carbon-nitrogen bond, transferring the amino group to the coenzyme, and
releasing an α-keto acid.

The coenzyme, which now carries an amine group and is called
**pyridoxamine phospate** (PMP), next transfers the amine group to
α-ketoglutarate (to form glutamate) through a reversal of the whole
process depicted above.

Transamination reaction, phase 2

(transfer of amino group from coenzyme to acceptor molecule)

<img src="media/image735.emf" style="width:4.93542in;height:2in" />

Mechanism:

*see exercise below*

fig 18

In a transamination reaction, the PLP coenzyme not only provides an
electron sink, it also serves as a temporary 'parking place' for an
amino group as it is transferred from donor to acceptor.

<u>Exercise 17.2</u>: Show a complete, step-by-step mechanism for 'phase
2' of the transamination reaction above.

Here is an example of a transamination reaction in the arginine
biosynthesis pathway: EC 2.6.1.11

<img src="media/image736.emf"
style="width:5.72222in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 19

<u>Exercise 17.3</u>:

a\) Draw arrows for the first mechanistic step of 'phase 2' of the above
transaminase reaction.

b\) Which carbon on the substrate side of the reaction will eventually
become the α-carbon of arginine?

<u>Exercise 17.4</u>: Propose a pathway, with three enzymatic steps, for
the biosynthesis of serine from 3-phosphoglycerate. Include a
generalized ('-ase') enzyme name for each step. Glutamate plays a role
in the process as an amino group donor.

<img src="media/image737.emf"
style="width:3.47222in;height:1.05556in" />

fig 20

<u>17.1F: PLP-dependent β-elimination and β-substitution</u>

*(Before starting this section, it would be a good idea to review E1cb
β-elimination and conjugate addition reaction mechanisms in chapter
13.4)*

By now it should be pretty apparent that PLP is a pretty versatile
coenzyme! Two more reaction types in the PLP toolbox are β-elimination
and β-substitution on amino acid substrates.

In a PLP-dependent β-elimination reaction, the coenzyme simply helps to
stabilize the carbanion intermediate of the E1cb mechanism:

A PLP-dependent β-elimination reaction

<img src="media/image738.emf"
style="width:2.77778in;height:0.94444in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image739.emf"
style="width:5.29653in;height:2.26875in" />

fig 21 fig 22

Serine dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.13) catalyzes a PLP-dependent β-elimination
in the first step of the serine degradation pathway:

<img src="media/image740.emf"
style="width:5.16667in;height:3.40764in" />

fig 23

A β-substitution reaction is simply E1cb elimination followed directly
by the reverse reaction (conjugate addition) with a different
nucleophile (Y in the figure below):

A β-substitution reaction:

<img src="media/image741.emf"
style="width:5.80556in;height:1.90764in" />

fig 24

In many bacteria, the synthesis of cysteine from serine includes a
PLP-dependent β-substitution step (EC 2.5.1.47).

<img src="media/image742.emf"
style="width:3.49097in;height:1.63889in" />

fig 25

<u>Exercise 17.5</u>: Draw a mechanism for the conjugate addition phase
of the reaction above (end with the cysteine-PLP adduct).

<u>17.1G: PLP-dependent γ-elimination and γ-substitution reactions</u>

The electron sink capability of PLP allows some enzymes to catalyze
eliminations at the γ-carbon of some amino acid side chains, rather than
at the β-carbon. The secret to understanding the mechanism of a
γ-elimination is that PLP essentially acts as an electron sink *twice* -
it absorbs the excess electron density from not one but two proton
abstractions.

PLP-dependent γ-elimination

<img src="media/image743.emf"
style="width:2.72222in;height:1.02778in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image744.emf"
style="width:5.13889in;height:4.83333in" />

fig 26 fig 27

In a familiar first step, the α-proton of the amino acid is abstracted
by an enzymatic base, and the electron density is absorbed by PLP. Next
comes the new part - before anything happens to the electron density
from the first proton abstraction, a second proton, this time from the
β-carbon on the side chain, is abstracted, forming an enamine
intermediate (step 2). The phenolic proton on the pyridoxal ring of PLP
donates a proton to the nitrogen. In step 3, the leaving is expelled and
a new π-bond forms between the β and γ carbons (step 3). This π-bond is
short-lived, however, as the electron density from the first proton
abstraction, which has been 'stored' in PLP all this time, flows back up
to protonate the α-carbon (step 4), leaving the γ-elimination product
linked to PLP via the usual imine connection.

An example is the cystathionine γ-lyase reaction in the methionine
degradation pathway (EC 4.4.1.1):

<img src="media/image745.emf"
style="width:4.05556in;height:1.86111in" />

fig 28

A related reaction is PLP-dependent γ-substitution, which again is
simply γ-elimination of a leaving group (X in the figure below) followed
directly by the reverse process (a γ-addition) with a different
nucleophile ('Nu' in the figure below).

PLP-dependent γ-substitution:

<img src="media/image746.emf"
style="width:2.72222in;height:1.02778in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image747.emf"
style="width:5.62986in;height:5.33333in" />

fig 29 fig 30

Below is a PLP-dependent γ-substitution reaction in the methionine
degradation pathway (EC 4.2.1.22):

<img src="media/image748.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.76324in" />

fig 31

<u>17.1H: Racemase to aldolase: altering the course of a PLP
reaction</u>

We have seen how PLP-dependent enzymes catalyze a variety of reaction
types - racemization, retroaldol/retro-Claisen cleavage,
transaminination, elimination, and substitution - which, despite their
apparent diversity, are all characterized by formation of a critical
carbanion intermediate which is stabilized by the 'electron sink'
property of the PLP coenzyme. Given this common mechanistic feature, it
would be reasonable to propose that the active site architecture of
these enzymes might also be quite close. This idea was nicely
illustrated by an experiment in which researchers found that changing a
single active site amino acid of PLP-dependent alanine racemase was
sufficient to turn it into a retro-aldolase (*J. Am. Chem. Soc*.
**2003**, *125*, 10158).

In the 'wild-type' (natural) alanine racemase reaction, an active site
histidine (red in figure below) deprotonates a neighboring tyrosine
residue (blue), which in turn acts as the catalytic base abstracting the
α-proton of the substrate. When researchers changed the tyrosine to an
alanine (using a technique called 'site-directed mutagenesis'), and
substituted β-hydroxytyrosine for the alanine substrate, the new
'mutant' enzyme catalyzed a retro-aldol reaction.

<img src="media/image749.emf"
style="width:3.93542in;height:5.07431in" />

fig 32

Notice what has happened here: the basic histidine, with no tyrosine to
deprotonate because of the mutation, is instead positioned to abstract a
proton from the β-hydroxyl group of the new substrate, setting up a
retroaldol cleavage. That was all it took to change a racemase into a
retroaldolase, because the necessary PLP electron sink system was all
left in place. The researchers predicted correctly that the phenyl ring
of β-hydroxy tyrosine would fit nicely in the space left empty due to
the tyrosine to alanine change in the mutant enzyme's structure

These results underline the close mechanistic relationship between two
PLP-dependent reactions which, at first glance, appear to be quite
different - and suggest that PLP-dependent racemases and aldolases may
have evolved from a common 'ancestor' enzyme.

<u>17.1I: Stereoelectronic considerations of PLP-dependent reactions</u>

Recall that all PLP-dependent reactions involve the cleavage of one of
the bonds coming from the α-carbon of an amino acid substrate, with the
coenzyme serving as an 'electron sink' to stabilize the intermediate
that results. PLP-dependent enzymes accelerate this bond-breaking step
by binding the substrate-PLP adduct in a conformation such that the bond
being broken is close to perpendicular to the plane formed by the
conjugated π system of PLP: this way, as the α-carbon transitions from
sp<sup>3</sup> to sp<sup>2</sup> hybridization, the unhybridized *p*
orbital is already oriented to overlap with the rest of the conjugated
system. For example, in alanine racemase the first step is cleavage of
the Cα-H bond, so it must be that bond which is positioned
near-perpendicular to the PLP plane:

<img src="media/image750.emf" style="width:6in;height:3.06849in" />

Likewise, in an amino acid decarboxylase, the Cα-carboxylate bond is
held near-perpendicular to the PLP plane, and in
hydroxymethyltransferase, the Cα-Cβ bond is in the perpendicular
orientation:

<img src="media/image751.emf"
style="width:5.52778in;height:1.58333in" />

These are all good examples of how enzymatic catalysis is achieved, in
part, by the ability of the active site to bind the substrate molecule
in a specific conformation which contributes to the lowering of the
activation energy of a key reaction step.

**Section 17.2: Thiamine diphosphate (Vitamin B<sub>1</sub>)**

Thiamine diphosphate (ThDP, sometimes also abbreviated TPP or ThPP) is a
coenzyme which, like PLP, acts as an electron sink to stabilize key
carbanion intermediates. The most important part of the ThDP molecule
from a catalytic standpoint is its thiazole ring.

<img src="media/image752.emf"
style="width:2.32431in;height:1.63889in" />

fig 33

The proton on the carbon between nitrogen and sulfur on the thiazole
ring is weakly acidic, with a pKa of about 18.

<img src="media/image753.emf"
style="width:2.46319in;height:1.27778in" />

fig 34

The reason for its acidity lies partly in the ability of the neighboring
sulfur atom to accept, in its open *d*-orbitals, some of the excess
electron density of the conjugate base. Another reason is that the
positive charge on the nitrogen helps to stabilize the negative charge
on the conjugate base. The deprotonated thiazole is called an **ylide,**
which is a general term for a species with adjacent positively and
negatively charged atoms.

The negatively charged carbon on the ylide form of ThDP is nucleophilic,
and as we shall soon see, the first step of most TPP-dependent reactions
is nucleophilic attack of the ylide carbon on a carbonyl group of the
reaction substrate.

ThDP plays a key role in a variety of reaction types, but the common
theme in all ThDP-dependent reactions is cleavage of a bond adjacent to
the carbonyl carbon of a ketone or aldehyde.

Thiamine diphosphate assists in breaking bonds next to a ketone or
aldehyde:

<img src="media/image754.emf"
style="width:3.57431in;height:0.79653in" />

fig 35

Consider this hypothetical decarboxylation step:

<img src="media/image755.emf"
style="width:3.54653in;height:0.77778in" />

fig 37

Hopefully, you can quickly recognize that this is *not* a chemically
reasonable step, because the intermediate species which results from
decarboxylation has a negative charge localized on the ketone carbon - a
very unstable, unlikely intermediate indeed.

(Recall from section 13.1 that decarboxylation steps usually result in
intermediates in which the negative formal charge is delocalized to an
oxygen or nitrogen - in other words, enolates or enamines.)

Now consider, however, a reaction going on in your cells right now,
catalyzed by the enzyme pyruvate decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.1):

<img src="media/image756.emf"
style="width:3.18542in;height:0.87986in" />

fig 36

Somehow, the enzyme manages to accomplish this 'impossible'
decarboxylation. How does this happen? Here is where the thiamine
diphosphate coenzyme comes in.

A ThDP-dependent decarboxylation reaction (pyruvate decarboxylase):

<img src="media/image757.emf"
style="width:2.99097in;height:0.72222in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image758.emf"
style="width:5.99097in;height:4.51875in" />

fig 36a fig 38

Upon binding to the enzyme's active site, ThDP quickly loses a proton.
The nucleophilic ylide carbon then adds to the carbonyl carbon of
pyruvate.

Look carefully at the intermediate that results from step 1 in the
mechanism above. The thiazole ring of ThDP, once it has added to the
carbonyl of pyruvate, provides an 'electron sink' to absorb the
electrons from decarboxylation (step 2). Note which bond is breaking in
step 2 - as was mentioned earlier, the common function of ThDP is to
make possible the cleavage of a bond to a carbonyl carbon.

In step 3, the electrons from decarboxylation flow back to abstract a
proton from an acidic group in the active site. All that remains is for
the product to break free of thiamine in step 4.

Thiamine can also assist in decarboxylation-addition reactions:

ThDP-dependent decarboxylation-addition:

<img src="media/image759.emf"
style="width:4.05556in;height:0.79653in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image760.emf"
style="width:5.52778in;height:5.02778in" />

fig 39a fig 39

Here, the electron-rich intermediate formed from the decarboxylation
step (step 2) simply goes on to act as a nucleophile rather than as a
base, adding to the carbonyl group of an aldehyde or ketone (step 3). As
before, the product breaks free of ThDP in step 4.

An example is the first step in the biosynthetic pathway for isoprenoid
compounds in bacteria:

<img src="media/image761.emf"
style="width:5.26875in;height:0.80556in" />

fig 40

Transketolase, a ThDP-dependent enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway
of sugar metabolism, catalyzes a carbon-carbon bond break step, followed
by a carbon-carbon bond forming step. The substrates and products are at
similar energy levels, so the reaction is completely reversible.

Transketolase reaction:

<img src="media/image762.emf"
style="width:5.46319in;height:0.72222in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image763.emf"
style="width:5.85208in;height:4.72222in" />

Below is an actual example of a transketolase-catalyzed transformation
from the pentose phosphate pathway (shown in Fischer projections, as is
common for sugar structures).

<img src="media/image764.emf"
style="width:5.43542in;height:2.16667in" />

fig 43

<u>Exercise 17.6</u>: As was mentioned above, the transketolase reaction
is highly reversible. Do you think the same can be said for the
decarboxylation and decarboxylation-addition reactions we saw in this
section? Why or why not?

<u>Exercise 17.7</u>: (Challenging!) Propose a mechanism for the
reaction below. Hint: This is a ThDP-facilitated decarboxylation/
Michael addition, followed by E1cb elimination of pyruvate. A Michael
addition is the name for a conjugate addition with a carbon nucleophile.
(*J. Mol. Biol*. **2010**, *401*, 253).

<img src="media/image765.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.05477in" />

fig 44

<u>Exercise 17.8:</u> Propose a mechanism for the reaction below.
*Hint*: the mechanism can be described as a ThDP-facilitated dehydration
step, followed by a tautomerization step, followed by a *hydrolytic*
expulsion of ThDP (a different kind of ThDP expulsion from what we have
seen so far!)

<img src="media/image766.emf"
style="width:2.80556in;height:0.77778in" />

fig 44a

**Section 17.3: Thiamine diphosphate, lipoamide and the pyruvate
dehydrogenase reaction**

The enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase is one of the most central of all the
enzymes of central metabolism: by converting pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, it
links glycolysis (where glucose is broken down into pyruvate) to the
citric acid cycle, into which carbons enter in the form of acetyl-CoA.
Five ceonzymes are involved: coenzyme A, nicotinamide, thiamine
diphosphate, FAD, and finally lipoamide, one which is new to us at this
point.

Reaction catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase:

<img src="media/image767.emf" style="width:3.25in;height:1.27778in" />

fig 45

You will learn more about the structure and metabolic role of this
complex and remarkable enzyme in a biochemistry course. Here, we will
focus on the multi-step organic reaction it catalyzes, which we are at
long last equipped to understand.

Looking at the reaction, you should recognize that, first of all, the
pyruvate substrate is being oxidized - it starts out as a ketone, and
ends up as a thioester, losing carbon dioxide in the process.
Ultimately, the oxidizing agent in this reaction is NAD<sup>+</sup>, but
the reduction of NAD<sup>+</sup> is linked to the oxidative
decarboxylation of pyruvate by FAD and a disulfide-containing coenzyme
called **lipoamide**, which is lipoic acid attached by an amide linkage
to a lysine residue on the enzyme.

<img src="media/image768.emf" style="width:4in;height:3.58333in" />

fig 45a

The second thing to notice is that, because the reaction involves
breaking the bond between the ketone carbon and an adjacent carbon,
thiamine diphosphate (ThDP) coenzyme is required. In fact, the first
phase of the reaction (steps 1 and 2 below) is identical to that of
pyruvate *decarboxylase*, an enzyme we discussed a few pages ago.

The pyruvate decarboxylase reaction mechanism

Phase 1: Decarboxylation of pyruvate

<img src="media/image769.emf"
style="width:5.18542in;height:2.15764in" />

fig 46

The ThDP-stabilized carbanion then acts as a nucleophile, cleaving the
disulfide bridge of lipoamide (step 3 below). It is in this step that
oxidation of the substrate is actually occurring. After the resulting
thioester product is released from ThDP (step 4 below), it undergoes
transesterification form acetyl-CoA, the product of the reaction.

Phase 2 of the pyruvate decarboxylase reaction mechanism:
lipoamide-mediate oxidation to acetyl-CoA

<img src="media/image770.emf"
style="width:5.87986in;height:4.08333in" />

fig 47

We are not done yet! In order for the catalytic cycle to be complete,
the reduced dihydrolipoamide must be regenerated back to its oxidized
state through disulfide exchange with a disulfide bond on the enzyme.
The pair of enzymatic cysteines is then oxidized back to disulfide form
by an FAD-dependent reaction.

Phase 3 of the pyruvate decarboxylase reaction mechanism: regeneration
of lipoamide

<img src="media/image771.emf"
style="width:4.85208in;height:4.19444in" />

fig 48

Finally, FAD is regenerated with concurrent reduction of
NAD<sup>+</sup>:

Phase 4: Regeneration of FADH<sub>2</sub>:

<img src="media/image772.emf"
style="width:5.30556in;height:1.46319in" />

fig 49

**Section 17.4: Folate**

Folate, or vitamin B<sub>9</sub>, is essential for a variety of
important reactions in nucleotide and amino acid metabolism. The
reactive part of folate is the **pterin** ring system, shown in red
below. The conventional atom numbering system for folate is also
indicated.

<img src="media/image773.emf"
style="width:3.83333in;height:1.90764in" />

fig 50

<u>17.4A: Active forms of folate</u>

Folate is active as a coenzyme in its reduced forms, dihydrofolate and
tetrahydrofolate, which are formed by NADPH-dependent imine
hydrogenation steps (section 15.3).

<img src="media/image774.emf"
style="width:4.93542in;height:4.30556in" />

fig 51

The metabolic role of folate is to serve as a donor or acceptor in
single-carbon transfer reactions. How is folate different from
*S*-adenosylmethionine (SAM, section 8.8A) which also serves as a
single-carbon donor? Recall that SAM donates a single carbon in the form
of a methyl group: essentially, the single carbon of SAM is in the
methanol (CH<sub>3</sub>OH) oxidation state, because it has only one
bond to a heteroatom (specifically, to sulfur). (Refer to section 15.1
for a review of oxidation states).

<img src="media/image775.emf"
style="width:3.43542in;height:2.08333in" />

fig 52a

Folate coenzymes, on the other hand, can carry a single carbon in the
*formaldehyde* and *formate* oxidation states, in addition to the
methanol oxidation state. By 'formaldehyde' and 'formate' oxidation
state, we mean that the carbon has two and three bonds to heteroatoms,
respectively.

<img src="media/image776.emf"
style="width:3.90764in;height:6.51875in" />

fig 52

Some key reactions in nucleic acid and amino acid metabolic pathways
involve transfer of a single carbon in the formaldehyde or formate
states. However, this could present problems. Formaldehyde by itself is
very toxic: in particular, it tends to spontaneously form unwanted
crosslinks between amine groups (eg. lysine side chains) in proteins.

<img src="media/image777.emf"
style="width:5.21319in;height:1.85208in" />

fig 53

Free formaldehyde is *too reactive*, and would cause damage to a cell.
The CH<sub>2</sub>-THF coenzyme is stable in solution, but in the active
site of certain enzymes it is reactive enough to serve as a formaldehyde
donor, as we will see shortly.

Free formate, on the other hand, is a carboxylate, and we know from
chapter 11 that carboxylates are *not reactive* in acyl substitution
steps. Formate could be activated by phosphorylation, of course, but the
resulting formyl phosphate would be *too* reactive in many enzyme active
sites. A 'happy medium' has been found in which carbons in the formate
oxidation state are carried by folate in the form of f-THF: once again,
the carbon donor is stable in solution, but sufficiently reactive in
certain enzyme active sites to accomplish controlled transfer of a
formate group.

<u>17.4B: Formation of formyl-THF and methylene-THF</u>

Formyltetrahydrofolate (f-THF) is formed from THF and a formate molecule
which has been activated by phosphorylation (formyl phosphate, as stated
in the paragraph above, is a high reactive intermediate, but is held
inside the enzyme's active site for immediate reaction with the incoming
amine group of THF).

<img src="media/image778.emf"
style="width:5.72222in;height:2.76875in" />

fig 54

There are two main metabolic routes to CH<sub>2</sub>-THF. One route is
just the last step of the serine hydroxymethyltransferase reaction we
have already seen in section 17.1D: the formaldehyde formed in the
PLP-dependent phase of the reaction stays in the active site, and the
oxygen is displaced by successive attacks from the amine nucleophiles at
the 5 and 10 positions of THF. (Notice the similarity to the
formaldehyde-protein crosslinking reaction shown earlier in this
section.)

<img src="media/image779.emf"
style="width:5.51875in;height:3.32431in" />

fig 55

In the second route, f-THF is dehydrated, then the resulting
methenyl-THF intermediate is reduced by NADPH.

<img src="media/image780.emf"
style="width:4.55556in;height:4.62986in" />

fig 56

Methylene-THF (CH<sub>2</sub>-THF) is reduced to methyl-THF
(CH<sub>3</sub>-THF) in a flavin-dependent reaction. *Biochemistry*
**2001**, *40*, 6216

<img src="media/image781.emf"
style="width:4.91667in;height:1.88889in" />

fig 56a

Recall from the introduction to this chapter that babies who were in the
womb during the Dutch Hunger Winter faced a higher risk, when they
reached adulthood, of conditions such as obesity and schizophrenia, most
likely caused by disruptions in the *S*-adenosylmethionine-dependent
methylation of their DNA, which was in turn caused by their mothers not
getting enough folate. CH<sub>3</sub>-THF is the source of the methyl
group in methionine, which ultimately becomes the methyl group in SAM.
The methylation of homocysteine to methionine (below) involves a
cobalt-containing coenzyme called cobalamin, but the mechanism for this
reaction is beyond the scope of our discussion. The second reaction
below (formation of SAM) is simply an S<sub>N</sub>2 displacement of the
inorganic triphosphate leaving group on ATP by the nucleophilic sulfur
in methionine.

<img src="media/image782.emf"
style="width:4.11111in;height:4.68542in" />

fig 56b

<u>17.4C: Single-carbon transfer with formyl-THF</u>

There are two important f-THF-dependent formylation steps in the
biosynthetic pathways for purine nucleophiles. Both are simply
transamidation reactions: in other words, conversion by the nucleophilic
acyl substitution mechanism (chapter 11) of one amide to another.

Glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase reaction:

<img src="media/image783.emf"
style="width:4.02778in;height:4.02778in" />

fig 57

Aminoimidazole carboxamide transformylase reaction:

<img src="media/image784.emf"
style="width:4.47222in;height:1.65764in" />

fig 58

<u>Exercise 17.9</u>: Which of the two transformylase reactions above
would you expect to be more kinetically favorable? Explain your
reasoning.

<u>Exercise 17.10</u>: Predict the structure of 'product X' in the
reaction below, from the histidine degradation pathway.

<img src="media/image785.emf"
style="width:5.80556in;height:1.52778in" />

fig 59

<u>17.4D: Single-carbon transfer with methylene-THF</u>

CH<sub>2</sub>-THF serves as a single-carbon donor in a somewhat
complicated reaction in the biosynthesis of the DNA monomer
doexythymidine monophosphate (dTMP).

<img src="media/image786.emf"
style="width:3.82431in;height:1.76875in" />

fig 60

The reactions begins with the five-membered ring of CH<sub>2</sub>-THF
breaking apart to create an imine intermediate (step 1 below). The imine
becomes an electrophile in a conjugate addition step (section 13.4,
steps 2-3 below). Note that after step 1, the second ring in the pterin
system of the coenzyme is abbreviated for clarity.

<img src="media/image787.emf" style="width:6in;height:2.90633in" />

fig 61

Next, tetrahydrofolate is eliminated in an E1cb elimination mechanism
(steps 4 and 5). Notice that this is where the single carbon is
transferred from methyl-THF to dUMP.

<img src="media/image788.emf" style="width:5.75in;height:2.93542in" />

fig 62

The final step in the mechanism is where it gets *really* interesting: a
hydride ion is transferred from the tetrahydrofolate coenzyme to the
methylene (CH<sub>2</sub>) group on the deoxynucleotide substrate.
Essentially, this is a *conjugated* S<sub>N</sub>2 step with hydride as
the nucleophile and the active site cysteine as the leaving group.

<img src="media/image789.emf"
style="width:4.96319in;height:3.35208in" />

fig 63

**  
**

**Key learning objectives for this chapter**

*After completing this chapter, you should be able to:*

Understand how pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) acts as an 'electron sink' in a
variety of reactions in amino acid metabolism.

Recognize and draw mechanisms for PLP-dependent transformations of the
following types:

racemization

decarboxylation

transamination

retroaldol cleavage

retro-Claisen cleavage

β-elimination

β-substitution

γ-elimination

γ-substitution

Recognize transformations - amino acid decarboxylation and
transamination, for example - in which chemical steps occur that simply
don't 'make sense' unless the electron sink role of PLP is taken into
account.

Understand how the orientation of the substrate in relation to the plane
formed by the conjugated π system of PLP is a major factor in catalysis
of PLP-dependent reactions.

Understand how thiamine diphosphate (ThDP) acts as an 'electron sink' in
a variety of reactions in which a bond to a carbonyl carbon is broken,
and how these steps do not 'make sense' unless the electron sink role of
ThDP is taken into account.

Recognize transformations for which ThDP is likely required, and be able
to draw reasonable mechanisms for them.

Understand how ThDP acts in tandem with lipoamide, flavin, and
nicotinamide in the reaction catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase.

Recognize folate in its various forms - DHF, THF, f-THF,
CH<sub>2</sub>-THF, and CH<sub>3</sub>-THF - functions in a variety of
one-carbon transfer steps. Be able to recognize the oxidation state of
the carbon being transferred in a folate-depenent step.

Problems

**P17.1:** Here is a chance to test your ability to recognize reactions
catalyzed by enzymes using three coenzymes - thiamine diphosphate,
pyridoxal phosphate, and folate - that we have studied in this chapter.
For each generalized reaction, look carefully at the transformation that
is taking place, and decide which of the three coenzymes is likely to be
required. Then, draw the single mechanistic step by which the bond
identified by an arrow is broken or formed. In the cases where a double
bond is indicated, show the mechanistic step in which the *σ bond* is
formed. In each case, your drawing should include the structure of the
reactive part of the coenzyme, and should clearly show the role it plays
in catalyzing the mechanistic step you are drawing.

a\)

<img src="media/image790.emf"
style="width:2.32431in;height:0.66667in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image791.emf"
style="width:2.72222in;height:0.61111in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image792.emf"
style="width:3.77778in;height:0.79653in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image793.emf"
style="width:2.82431in;height:0.82431in" />

e\)

<img src="media/image794.emf" style="width:3in;height:0.65764in" />

f\)

<img src="media/image795.emf"
style="width:3.87986in;height:0.85208in" />

g\)

<img src="media/image796.emf"
style="width:3.12986in;height:0.82431in" />

h\)

<img src="media/image797.emf" style="width:2.75in;height:0.93542in" />

i\)

<img src="media/image798.emf"
style="width:3.12986in;height:0.82431in" />

j\)

<img src="media/image799.emf"
style="width:2.91667in;height:0.96319in" />

k\)

<img src="media/image800.emf"
style="width:3.85208in;height:0.87986in" />

l\)

<img src="media/image801.emf"
style="width:4.90764in;height:0.77778in" />

m\)

<img src="media/image802.emf"
style="width:2.99097in;height:0.72222in" />

**P17.2:** The final step in the biosynthesis of the amino acid
tryptophan is a PLP-dependent condensation between serine and indole,
shown below (EC 4.2.1.20). The reaction mechanism involves steps that
are familiar from this chapter, but also incorporates a reaction type we
studied in chapter 14. Propose a mechanism.

<img src="media/image803.emf"
style="width:4.96319in;height:1.49097in" />

**P17.3:** Draw a reasonable mechanism for the following reaction,
identifying the species denoted by questions marks. (*Biochemistry*
**2012**, *51*, 3059)

<img src="media/image804.emf"
style="width:3.02778in;height:1.27778in" />

<img src="media/image805.gif"
alt="https://ssl.gstatic.com/ui/v1/icons/mail/images/cleardot.gif" />

**P17.4**: Propose a mechanism for the reaction below, which is part of
the anaerobic catabolism of alcohols in some species of bacteria.
(*ChemBioChem* **2014**, *15*, 389)

<img src="media/image806.emf"
style="width:3.26875in;height:0.82431in" />

**P17.5**: Identify cosubstrate A and propose a mechanism for the
reaction shown below, which was reported to occur in the thermophilic
bacterium *Thermosporothrix hazakensis*. (*ChemBioChem* **2014** *15*,
527).

<img src="media/image807.emf"
style="width:5.12986in;height:1.04653in" />

**P17.6:** Propose a mechanism for each of the reactions below, being
sure to show the role played by the coenzyme (you need to determine
which coenzyme is needed in each case).

a\)

<img src="media/image808.emf"
style="width:4.40764in;height:1.30556in" />

b\) (E.C. 2.2.1.6)

<img src="media/image809.emf" style="width:3.5in;height:1.11111in" />

c\) [*Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl*. **2014**, *53*,
1943](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24505011).

http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201307989/full Fig 1 Orf
R rxn

<img src="media/image810.emf"
style="width:3.46319in;height:1.38889in" />

**P17.7:** Acetohydroxybutyrate is formed in a coenzyme-dependent
reaction between pyruvate and a 4-carbon compound. What is a likely
second substrate, coenzyme, and by-product (indicated below with a
question mark)?

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1367593105001043

<img src="media/image811.emf"
style="width:4.85208in;height:1.11111in" />

**P17.8**:

a\) The 'benzoin condensation' reaction was discovered in the 19th
century, and led eventually to a better understanding of ThDP-dependent
reactions in the cell. In a traditional benzoin condensation reaction,
cyanide ion (instead of ThDP) plays the role of electron acceptor.
Enzyme-catalyzed benzoin condensation reactions are also known to occur
in some bacteria*:* Pseudomonas fluorescens, for example, contains an
enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of (R)-benzoin.

<img src="media/image812.emf"
style="width:4.30556in;height:1.29653in" />

a\) Draw a mechanism for the enzyme-catalyzed (ThDP-dependent) benzoin
condensation reaction*.*

b\) Draw a mechanism for the cyanide-catalyzed benzoin condensation
reaction (non-enzymatic, basic conditions).

c\) The following ThDP-reaction was recently reported to be part of the
biosynthetic pathway for clavulanic acid, a compound that inhibits the
action of β-lactamases (β-lactamases are bacterial enzymes that
hydrolyze penicillin-based antibiotic drugs, rendering them
ineffective). As is typical for ThDP-dependent reactions, the first step
is addition of the ylide form of the coenzyme to the substrate carbonyl.
The next steps are (in order): dehydration, tautomerization, elimination
of phosphate, conjugate addition of arginine, and finally hydrolytic
cleavage of the coenzyme-product bond. Draw out a complete mechanism
that corresponds to this description.

<img src="media/image813.emf"
style="width:4.54653in;height:1.04653in" />

**P17.9:** Practice with PLP-dependent reactions:

a\) Propose a mechanism for this reaction, which is part of the
tryptophan degradation pathway (EC 3.7.1.3).

<img src="media/image814.emf"
style="width:4.40764in;height:0.92569in" />

b\) Propose a mechanism for the final step of the threonine biosynthesis
pathway (EC 4.2.3.1).

<img src="media/image815.emf"
style="width:3.27778in;height:1.21319in" />

c\) Propose a mechanism for the reaction catalyzed by aspartate
β-decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.12), which converts aspartate to alanine in a
PLP-dependent reaction.

d\) Sphingolipids are a type of membrane lipid found in the membranes of
all eukaryotic cells, and are most abundant in the cells of central the
central nervous system. Synthesis of sphingolipids involves the
PLP-dependent reaction below, catalyzed by serine palmitoyl transferase
(EC 2.3.1.50). Propose a mechanism.

<img src="media/image816.emf"
style="width:3.33333in;height:2.90764in" />

**P17.10:** As we saw in this chapter, PLP-dependent enzymes usually
catalyze reactions involving amino acid substrates. Here is an
exception, a PLP-dependent β-elimination reaction in the folate
biosynthetic pathway (EC 4.1.3.38). Propose a mechanism for this
reaction.

<img src="media/image817.emf"
style="width:3.51875in;height:1.55556in" />

**P17.11:** The final step in the degradation pathway for the amino acid
glycine (also known as the 'glycine cleavage system') is shown below.
Propose a likely mechanism, given that

evidence suggests that CH<sub>2</sub>NH<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> is an
intermediate.

<img src="media/image818.emf"
style="width:3.13889in;height:0.93056in" />

**P17.12:** As we saw in chapter 15, the usual biochemical role of
NAD<sup>+</sup> is to act as a hydride acceptor in dehydrogenation
reactions. An exception is the reaction catalyzed by the histidine
degradation pathway enzyme urocanase (EC 4.2.1.49).

<img src="media/image819.emf"
style="width:3.53333in;height:1.26667in" />

In this reaction, NAD<sup>+</sup> acts as a catalytic, electron-sink
coenzyme - it temporarily accepts electrons from a pi bond in the
substrate, resulting in a covalent substrate-NAD adduct. This allows a
key isomerization step to occur on the substrate through a
protonation-deprotonation mechanism, followed by addition of water,
cleavage of the substrate-NAD adduct to regenerate NAD<sup>+</sup>, and
finally tautomerization to the product. Propose a mechanism that fits
this description, and involves the intermediate below.

<img src="media/image820.emf"
style="width:1.27778in;height:2.17778in" />

**Pathway** **prediction problems**

**  
**  
**P17.13:** Propose a multistep pathway for each of the following
transformations. All involve at least one step requiring PLP, ThDP, or
folate.

a\) Below is portion of the biosynthesis of a modified membrane lipid in
*Salmonella* and other pathogenic bacteria. The modified membrane
confers antibiotic resistance to the bacterium. *Biochemistry* **2014**,
*53*, 796

<img src="media/image821.emf"
style="width:4.47222in;height:1.11111in" />

b\) Below is the biosynthetic pathway for phenethanol in yeast.
Phenethanol, which has a rose scent, is commonly used as a fragrance -
this pathway has been proposed as a potential 'green' enzymatic
synthesis to replace the traditional industrial synthesis, which uses
toxic reagents.

<img src="media/image822.emf"
style="width:3.15764in;height:1.30556in" />

c\) Below is an incomplete pathway diagram for the biosynthesis of the
amino acid lysine, starting from aspartate. Fill in the missing steps
and reactants/coenzymes to complete the diagram. The solid dot and
dashed circle are provided to help you to trace two of the carbons from
substrate to product.

<img src="media/image823.emf" style="width:6in;height:3.72114in" />

d\) Below is the second half of the tryptophan degradation pathway. Fill
in the missing steps and reactants/coenzymes to complete the diagram.

<img src="media/image824.emf" style="width:6in;height:0.88205in" />

d\) Below is an incomplete pathway diagram for the biosynthesis of
inosine monophosphate, a precursor to the nucleotides adenosine
monophosphate (AMP) and guanosine monophosphate (GMP). Fill in missing
steps and reactants/coenzymes to complete the diagram. Note that one
enzymatic step is provided (this is a carboxylation reaction of a type
that we have not studied).

<img src="media/image825.emf"
style="width:5.82431in;height:4.13889in" />

e\) We begin our study of organic chemistry with a story about a hot
pepper eating contest in Wisconsin (see the introduction the Chapter 1),
and a compound called capsaicin which causes the 'hot' in hot peppers.
As our last problem, let's try to predict some of the key steps in the
biosynthesis of capsaicin.

Phase 1:

<img src="media/image826.emf"
style="width:4.68542in;height:0.52778in" />

Phase 2:

<img src="media/image827.emf" style="width:6in;height:1.65623in" />

# Tables

**<u>List of tables:</u>**

**Table 1:** Some characteristic absorption frequencies in IR
spectroscopy

**Table 2**: Typical values for <sup>1</sup>H-NMR chemical shifts

**Table 3**: Typical values for <sup>13</sup>C-NMR chemical shifts

**Table 4**: Typical coupling constants in NMR

**Table 5:** The 20 common amino acids

**Table 6**: Structures of common coenzymes

**Table 7:** Representative acid constants

**Table 8:** Some common laboratory solvents, acids, and bases

**Table 9:** Examples of common functional groups in organic chemistry

##  Table 1: Some characteristic absorption frequencies in IR spectroscopy

| **<u>Bond type</u>**          | **<u>frequency (cm<sup>-1</sup>)</u>** |
|-------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| C-H alkanes                   | 2950 – 2850                            |
| C-H alkenes                   | 3080 – 3020                            |
| C-H aldehyde                  | \~2900                                 |
| C-H alkyne                    | \~3300                                 |
| alkyne triple bond            | 2250 – 2100 (s)                        |
| alkene double bond            | 1680 - 1620(s)                         |
| carbonyl, ketone              | 1725 – 1700 (s)                        |
| carbonyl, aldehyde            | 1740 – 1720 (s)                        |
| carbonyl, ester               | 1750 – 1730 (s)                        |
| carbonyl, acid                | 1725 – 1700 (s)                        |
| carbonyl, amide               | 1690 – 1650 (s)                        |
| O-H, alcohols                 | 3600 – 3200 (s, broad)                 |
| O-H, acids                    | 3000 – 2500 (broad)                    |
| C-O, alcohols, esters, ethers | 1300 - 1000                            |

s = strong absorbance

##  Table 2: Typical values for <sup>1</sup>H-NMR chemical shifts

| **<u>Hydrogen type</u>**                                              | **<u>Chemical shift (ppm)</u>** |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| RC**<u>H</u>**<sub>3</sub>                                            | 0.9 - 1.0                       |
| RC**<u>H</u>**<sub>2</sub>R                                           | 1.2 - 1.7                       |
| R<sub>3</sub>C**<u>H</u>**                                            | 1.5 – 2.0                       |
| <img src="media/image828.emf"                                         
 style="width:0.72222in;height:0.54653in" />                            | 2.0 – 2.3                       |
| <img src="media/image829.emf"                                         
 style="width:0.88889in;height:0.49097in" />                            | 1.5 – 1.8                       |
| RN**<u>H</u>**<sub>2</sub>                                            | 1 - 3                           |
| ArC**<u>H</u>**<sub>3</sub>                                           | 2.2 – 2.4                       |
| <img src="media/image830.emf"                                         
 style="width:0.86111in;height:0.17569in" />                            | 2.3 – 3.0                       |
| <img src="media/image831.emf"                                         
 style="width:0.72222in;height:0.30556in" />                            | 3.7 – 3.9                       |
| <img src="media/image832.emf" style="width:0.92569in;height:0.5in" /> | 3.7 – 3.9                       |
| RO**<u>H</u>**                                                        | 1 - 5                           |
| <img src="media/image833.emf"                                         
 style="width:0.72222in;height:0.49097in" />                            | 3.7 – 6.5                       |
| <img src="media/image834.emf"                                         
 style="width:0.75903in;height:0.75903in" />                            | 5 - 9                           |
| Ar**<u>H</u>**                                                        | 6.0 – 8.7                       |
| <img src="media/image835.emf"                                         
 style="width:0.57431in;height:0.54653in" />                            | 9.5 – 10.0                      |
| <img src="media/image836.emf"                                         
 style="width:0.66667in;height:0.52778in" />                            | 10 - 13                         |

Chemical shift values are in parts per million (ppm) relative to
tetramethylsilane.

##  Table 3: Typical values for <sup>13</sup>C-NMR chemical shifts

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 37%" />
<col style="width: 62%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong><u>Carbon type</u></strong></th>
<th><strong><u>Chemical shift (ppm)</u></strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>R<strong><u>C</u></strong>H<sub>3</sub></td>
<td>13 - 16</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>R<strong><u>C</u></strong>H<sub>2</sub>R</td>
<td>16 - 25</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>R<sub>3</sub><strong><u>C</u></strong>H</td>
<td>25 - 35</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><img src="media/image837.emf"
style="width:0.92569in;height:0.54653in" /></td>
<td>18 - 22</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><img src="media/image838.emf"
style="width:0.72222in;height:0.54653in" /></td>
<td>28 - 32</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>R<strong><u>C</u></strong>H<sub>2</sub>NHR</td>
<td>35 - 45</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>R<strong><u>C</u></strong>H<sub>2</sub>OH</td>
<td>50 - 65</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><img src="media/image839.emf"
style="width:0.86111in;height:0.17569in" /></td>
<td>65 - 70</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>RO<strong><u>C</u></strong>H<sub>2</sub>R</td>
<td>50 - 75</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><img src="media/image840.emf"
style="width:1.02778in;height:0.50903in" /></td>
<td>50 - 75</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><img src="media/image841.emf"
style="width:0.72222in;height:0.49097in" /></td>
<td>115 - 120</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><img src="media/image842.emf"
style="width:0.72222in;height:0.49097in" /></td>
<td>125 - 140</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>aromatic carbon</td>
<td>125 - 150</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p><img src="media/image843.emf"
style="width:0.55556in;height:0.5in" /></p>
<p>(carboxylic acid derivatives)</p></td>
<td>165 - 185</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><img src="media/image844.emf"
style="width:0.57431in;height:0.5in" /></td>
<td>190 - 200</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><img src="media/image845.emf"
style="width:0.55556in;height:0.5in" /></td>
<td>200 - 220</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

##  Table 4: Typical coupling constants in NMR

| **<u>H-H coupling</u>**                     | **<u>J (Hz)</u>** |     | **<u>C-H coupling</u>**                     | **<u>J (Hz)</u>** |
|---------------------------------------------|-------------------|-----|---------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| <img src="media/image846.emf"               
 style="width:0.86111in;height:0.65764in" />  | 6 -8              |     | <img src="media/image847.emf"               
                                                                         style="width:0.62986in;height:0.62986in" />  | 125 - 130         |
| <img src="media/image848.emf"               
 style="width:0.86111in;height:0.65764in" />  | 2 - 3             |     | <img src="media/image849.emf"               
                                                                         style="width:0.72222in;height:0.49097in" />  | 150 - 170         |
| <img src="media/image850.emf"               
 style="width:0.72222in;height:0.50903in" />  | 12 - 18           |     |                                             |                   |
| <img src="media/image851.emf"               
 style="width:0.72222in;height:0.50903in" />  | 6 - 12            |     |                                             |                   |
| <img src="media/image852.emf"               
 style="width:0.72222in;height:0.50903in" />  | 0 - 2             |     |                                             |                   |
| <img src="media/image853.emf"               
 style="width:0.72222in;height:0.82431in" />  | 6 - 10            |     |                                             |                   |
| <img src="media/image854.emf"               
 style="width:0.72222in;height:0.88889in" />  | 1- 3              |     |                                             |                   |

##  Table 5: The 20 common amino acids

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 19%" />
<col style="width: 23%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 18%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><img src="media/image855.emf"
style="width:0.90764in;height:0.54653in" /></th>
<th><img src="media/image856.emf"
style="width:0.90764in;height:0.54653in" /></th>
<th><img src="media/image857.emf"
style="width:0.90764in;height:0.65764in" /></th>
<th><img src="media/image858.emf"
style="width:0.90764in;height:0.88889in" /></th>
<th><img src="media/image859.emf"
style="width:0.90764in;height:0.85208in" /></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>Glycine<br />
</strong>(Gly, G)</td>
<td><strong>Alanine<br />
</strong>(Ala, A)</td>
<td><strong>Valine<br />
</strong>(Val, V)</td>
<td><strong>Leucine<br />
</strong>(Leu, L)</td>
<td><strong>Isoleucine<br />
</strong>(Ile, I)</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><img src="media/image860.emf"
style="width:1.05556in;height:1.05556in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image861.emf"
style="width:1.46319in;height:1.00903in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image862.emf"
style="width:1.34236in;height:1.29653in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image863.emf"
style="width:0.90764in;height:0.96319in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image864.emf"
style="width:0.90764in;height:0.65764in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>Phenylalanine<br />
</strong>(Phe, F)</td>
<td><p><strong>Tyrosine</strong></p>
<p>(Tyr, Y)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Tryptophan</strong></p>
<p>(Trp, W)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Methionine</strong></p>
<p>(Met, M)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Cysteine</strong></p>
<p>(Cys, C)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><img src="media/image865.emf"
style="width:0.90764in;height:0.65764in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image866.emf"
style="width:0.90764in;height:0.68542in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image867.emf"
style="width:1.11111in;height:1.12986in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image868.emf"
style="width:0.90764in;height:1in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image869.emf"
style="width:1.04653in;height:1in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Serine</strong></p>
<p>(Ser, S)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Threonine</strong></p>
<p>(Thr, T)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Arginine</strong></p>
<p>(Arg, R)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Lysine</strong></p>
<p>(Lys, K)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Histidine</strong></p>
<p>(His, H)</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><img src="media/image870.emf"
style="width:0.88889in;height:0.63889in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image871.emf"
style="width:0.92569in;height:1.07431in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image872.emf"
style="width:1.00903in;height:0.88889in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image873.emf"
style="width:0.92569in;height:1.00903in" /></td>
<td><img src="media/image874.emf"
style="width:1.04653in;height:0.88889in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p><strong>Proline</strong></p>
<p>(Pro, P)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Glutamate</strong></p>
<p>(Glu, E)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Aspartate</strong></p>
<p>(Asp, D)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Glutamine</strong></p>
<p>(Gln, Q)</p></td>
<td><p><strong>Asparagine</strong></p>
<p>(Asn, N)</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## <u> </u>Table 6: Structures of common coenzymes

<img src="media/image875.emf" style="width:6in;height:8.47028in" />

Table 5

<img src="media/image876.emf"
style="width:4.99097in;height:4.83333in" />

<img src="media/image877.emf"
style="width:5.29653in;height:2.36111in" />

<img src="media/image878.emf" style="width:6in;height:6.29653in" />

## <u> </u>Table 7: Representative acid constants. 

| **<u>acid</u>**                                                        | **<u>pK<sub>a</sub></u>** | **<u>conjugate base</u>**                                             |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <img src="media/image879.emf"                                          
 style="width:0.83333in;height:0.86111in" />                             | -10                       | <img src="media/image880.emf"                                         
                                                                                                      style="width:0.82431in;height:0.62986in" />                            |
| HCl                                                                    | -7                        | Cl<sup>-</sup>                                                        |
| H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup>                                             | -1.7                      | H<sub>2</sub>O                                                        |
| <img src="media/image881.emf"                                          
 style="width:0.75903in;height:0.74097in" />                             | -1.4                      | <img src="media/image882.emf"                                         
                                                                                                      style="width:0.75903in;height:0.50903in" />                            |
| <img src="media/image883.emf"                                          
 style="width:0.97222in;height:0.62986in" />                             | 1.0<sup>(i)</sup>         | <img src="media/image884.emf"                                         
                                                                                                      style="width:0.97222in;height:0.62986in" />                            |
| <img src="media/image885.emf"                                          
 style="width:0.92569in;height:0.87986in" />                             | 2.2<sup>(ii)</sup>        | <img src="media/image886.emf"                                         
                                                                                                      style="width:0.83333in;height:0.62986in" />                            |
| HF                                                                     | 3.2                       | F<sup>-</sup>                                                         |
| <img src="media/image887.emf"                                          
 style="width:0.87986in;height:0.69444in" />                             | 4.6                       | <img src="media/image888.emf"                                         
                                                                                                      style="width:0.87986in;height:0.58333in" />                            |
| <img src="media/image889.emf" style="width:0.66667in;height:0.5in" />  | 4-5                       | <img src="media/image890.emf" style="width:0.65764in;height:0.5in" /> |
| <img src="media/image891.emf" style="width:0.80556in;height:0.75in" /> | 5.3<sup>(ii)</sup>        | <img src="media/image892.emf"                                         
                                                                                                      style="width:0.58333in;height:0.72222in" />                            |

| **<u>acid</u>**                             | **<u>pK<sub>a</sub></u>** | **<u>conjugate base</u>**                   |
|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| <img src="media/image893.emf"               
 style="width:0.79653in;height:0.75903in" />  | 6.4                       | <img src="media/image894.emf"               
                                                                           style="width:0.75903in;height:0.77778in" />  |
| <img src="media/image895.emf"               
 style="width:0.97222in;height:0.62986in" />  | 6.5<sup>(i)</sup>         | <img src="media/image896.emf"               
                                                                           style="width:0.97222in;height:0.67569in" />  |
| <img src="media/image897.emf"               
 style="width:0.83333in;height:0.62986in" />  | 7.2<sup>(ii)</sup>        | <img src="media/image898.emf"               
                                                                           style="width:0.83333in;height:0.62986in" />  |
| <img src="media/image899.emf"               
 style="width:1.41667in;height:0.62986in" />  | 9.0                       | <img src="media/image900.emf"               
                                                                           style="width:1.41667in;height:0.62986in" />  |
| HCN                                         | 9.2                       | CN<sup>-</sup>                              |
| <img src="media/image901.emf"               
 style="width:0.67569in;height:0.50903in" />  | 9.2                       | <img src="media/image902.emf"               
                                                                           style="width:0.57431in;height:0.41667in" />  |
| <img src="media/image903.emf"               
 style="width:0.91667in;height:0.71319in" />  | 9.9<sup>(ii)</sup>        | <img src="media/image904.emf"               
                                                                           style="width:0.88889in;height:0.69444in" />  |
| <img src="media/image905.emf"               
 style="width:0.75903in;height:0.77778in" />  | 10.3<sup>(ii)</sup>       | <img src="media/image906.emf"               
                                                                           style="width:0.74097in;height:0.77778in" />  |
| RS**H**                                     | 10-11                     | RS<sup>-</sup>                              |
| RNH<sub>3</sub><sup>+</sup>                 | 10 -11                    | RNH<sub>2</sub>                             |
| <img src="media/image907.emf"               
 style="width:0.82431in;height:0.62986in" />  | 12.3<sup>(i)</sup>        | <img src="media/image908.emf"               
                                                                           style="width:0.83333in;height:0.67569in" />  |
| H<sub>2</sub>O                              | 15.7                      | OH<sup>-</sup>                              |

**<u>  
</u>**

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 38%" />
<col style="width: 31%" />
<col style="width: 29%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong><u>acid</u></strong></th>
<th><strong><u>pK<sub>a</sub></u></strong></th>
<th><strong><u>conjugate base</u></strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><img src="media/image909.emf"
style="width:0.72222in;height:0.54653in" /></td>
<td>17</td>
<td><img src="media/image910.emf"
style="width:0.66667in;height:0.5in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>RCH<sub>2</sub>O<strong>H</strong></td>
<td>16</td>
<td>RCH<sub>2</sub>O<sup>-</sup></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><img src="media/image911.emf"
style="width:0.75903in;height:0.71319in" /></td>
<td>19-20</td>
<td><img src="media/image912.emf"
style="width:0.75903in;height:0.75in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>RCC<strong>H</strong></p>
<p>terminal alkyne</p></td>
<td>25</td>
<td>RCC<sup>-</sup></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>H<sub>2</sub></td>
<td>35</td>
<td>H<sup>-</sup></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>NH<sub>3</sub></p>
<p>ammonia</p></td>
<td>38</td>
<td>NH<sub>2</sub><sup>-</sup></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

All pK<sub>a</sub> values, unless otherwise noted, are taken from March,
Jerry, <u>Advanced Organic Chemistry, Fourth Edition</u>, Wiley, New
York, 1992.

<sup>(i)</sup> Silva, J.J.R. Fraústo da, <u>The Biological Chemistry of
the Elements: the Inorganic Chemistry of Life, 2<sup>nd</sup>
Edition</u>, Oxford, New York, 2001.

<sup>(ii)</sup>Lide, David R. (ed.) <u>The CRC Handbook of Chemistry and
Physics</u>, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1995.

##  Table 8: Some common laboratory solvents, acids, and bases (fig 10)

S**olvents**

<img src="media/image913.emf"
style="width:4.75903in;height:4.00903in" />

**Acids**

<img src="media/image914.emf"
style="width:5.21319in;height:1.12986in" />

**Bases**

*very strong bases:*

<img src="media/image915.emf"
style="width:5.41667in;height:1.02778in" />

*weaker bases:*

<img src="media/image916.emf"
style="width:3.99097in;height:2.09236in" />  
**Table 9: Examples of common functional groups in organic chemistry**

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
<col style="width: 21%" />
<col style="width: 28%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>alkane</strong></th>
<th><img src="media/image917.emf"
style="width:0.87014in;height:0.62014in" /></th>
<th><strong>ketone</strong></th>
<th><img src="media/image918.emf"
style="width:0.87986in;height:0.54653in" /></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>alkene</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image919.emf"
style="width:0.72222in;height:0.49097in" /></td>
<td><strong>aldehyde</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image920.emf"
style="width:0.72222in;height:0.54653in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>alkyne</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image921.emf"
style="width:0.86111in;height:0.15764in" /></td>
<td><p><strong>imine</strong></p>
<p><strong>(Schiff base)</strong></p></td>
<td><img src="media/image922.emf"
style="width:0.87986in;height:0.65764in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>aromatic hydrocarbon</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image923.emf"
style="width:0.47222in;height:0.52778in" /></td>
<td><strong>carboxylic acid</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image924.emf"
style="width:0.82431in;height:0.54653in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>alkyl halide</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image925.emf"
style="width:0.65764in;height:0.62986in" /></td>
<td><strong>ester</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image926.emf"
style="width:1.08333in;height:0.54653in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>alcohol</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image927.emf"
style="width:0.88889in;height:0.62986in" /></td>
<td><strong>thioester</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image928.emf"
style="width:1.08333in;height:0.54653in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>thiol</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image929.emf"
style="width:0.87986in;height:0.62986in" /></td>
<td><strong>amide</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image930.emf"
style="width:1.08333in;height:0.74097in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>amine</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image931.emf"
style="width:0.92569in;height:0.62986in" /></td>
<td><strong>acyl phosphate</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image932.emf"
style="width:1.27778in;height:0.79653in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>ether</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image933.emf"
style="width:0.87986in;height:0.30556in" /></td>
<td><strong>acid chloride</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image934.emf"
style="width:0.75in;height:0.54653in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>sulfide</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image935.emf"
style="width:0.87986in;height:0.30556in" /></td>
<td><strong>phosphate ester</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image936.emf"
style="width:0.99097in;height:0.67569in" /></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>phenol</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image937.emf"
style="width:0.82431in;height:0.58333in" /></td>
<td><strong>phosphate diester</strong></td>
<td><img src="media/image938.emf"
style="width:0.99097in;height:0.65764in" /></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

# Appendix 1: Enzymatic reactions by metabolic pathway and EC number

*The EC (European Commission) number is a classification system for
enzymes, organized by the type of reaction catalyzed. You can use the
list below to search this textbook for information about the reaction
catalyzed by a given enzyme. You can also use the EC numbers to search
for information in databases such as SwissProt Enzyme Nomenclature
Database (<http://enzyme.expasy.org>) or the BRENDA Comprehensive Enzyme
Information System (<http://www.brenda-enzymes.org>).*

**<u>Glycolysis</u>**

Hexose kinase (EC 2.7.1.1)

Phosphoglucose isomerase (EC 5.3.1.9)

Phosphofructokinase (EC 2.7.1.56)

Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (EC 4.1.2.13)

Triose phosphate isomerase (5.3.1.1)

Gyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.12)

Phosphoglycerate kinase (EC 2.7.2.3)

Phosphoglycerate mutase (EC 5.4.2.1)

Enolase (EC 4.2.1.11)

Pyruvate kinase (EC 2.7.1.40)

2-Keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate (KDPG) aldolase (EC 4.1.2.14)

**<u>Gluconeogenesis</u>**

Pyruvate carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.1)

Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (EC 4.1.1.32)

Phosphoglycerate kinase (EC 2.7.2.3)

Fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase (EC 3.1.3.11)

Glucose 6-phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.9)

**<u>  
Citric Acid (TCA) Cycle</u>**

Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (EC 1.2.4.1)

Citrate synthase (EC 2.3.3.8)

Aconitase (EC 4.2.1.3)

Isocitrate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.42)

α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex:

Oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.4.2)

Dihydrolipoyl succinyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.61)

Dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (EC 1.8.1.4)

Succinyl CoA synthetase (EC 6.2.1.4)

Succinate dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.5.1)

Fumarase (EC 4.2.1.2)

Malate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.37)

**<u>Fermentation</u>**

Pyruvate decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.1)

Alcohol dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.1)

Lactate dehydrogenase ((EC 1.1.1.27)

**<u>Pentose phosphate pathway/Calvin Cycle</u>**

Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.49)

Gluconolactonase (EC 3.1.1.17)

6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.43)

Phosphopentose epimerase (EC 5.1.3.1)

Phosphopentose isomerase (EC 5.3.1.6)

Transketolase (EC 2.2.1.1)

Transaldolase (EC 2.2.1.2)

Rubisco (EC 4.1.1.39)

Aldolase (EC 4.1.2.13)

**<u>Fatty acid oxidation</u>**

Acyl CoA synthetase (EC 6.2.1.1)

Carnitine acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.21)

Acyl CoA dehydrogenase (eg. EC 1.3.99.13)

Enoyl CoA hydratase (eg. 4.2.1.74)

3-hydroxyacyl CoA dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.35)

β-Keto thiolase (EC 2.3.1.16)

***  
Unsaturated fatty acids:***

*cis*-Enoyl-CoA isomerase (eg. EC 5.3.3.8)

2,4-Dienoyl CoA reductase (EC 1.3.1.34)

Glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.8)

**<u>Fatty acid biosynthesis</u>**

Acetyl CoA carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.2)

Acyl CoA synthetase (EC 6.2.1.1)

ACP transacylase (EC 2.3.1.38)

β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase (EC 2.3.1.41)

β-ketoacyl-ACP hydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.35)

3-hydroxyacyl dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.58)

Enoyl-ACP reductase (EC 1.3.1.10)

Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.99.3)

Monoacylglycerol acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.22)

**<u>Isoprenoid biosynthesis</u>**

***Mevalonate pathway** (from acetyl CoA):*

Acetoacetyl CoA acetyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.9)

3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase (EC 2.3.3.10)

HMG-CoA reductase (EC 1.1.1.34)

Mevalonate kinase (EC 2.7.1.36)

Phosphomevalonate kinase (EC 2.7.4.2)

Mevalonate diphosphate decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.33)

***Deoxyxylulose pathway** (from pyruvate and glyceraldehyde
phosphate):*

Deoxyxylulose phosphate synthase (EC 2.2.1.7)

Deoxyxylulose phosphate reductoisomerase (EC 1.1.1.267

MEP cytidylyltransferase (EC 2.7.7.60)

CDP-ME kinase (EC 2.7.1.148)

Methylerithritol 2,4-cyclodiphosphate synthase (EC 4.6.1.12)

***  
other:***

isopentenyl diphosphate isomerase (EC 5.3.3.2)

geranyl diphosphate synthase (EC 2.5.1.1)

farnesyl diphosphate synthase (EC 2.5.1.10)

squalene synthase (EC 2.5.1.21)

oxidosqualene cyclase (EC 5.4.99.7)

DMAPP-tryptophan synthase (EC 2.5.1.34)

**<u>Deoxyribonucleotide biosynthesis</u>**

PRPP synthetase (EC 2.7.6.1)

**UMP** *(from ammonia, bicarbonate, and aspartate):*

Carbamoyl phosphate synthase (EC 6.3.5.5)

Aspartate carbamoyltransferase (EC 2.1.3.2)

Dihydroorotase (EC 2.5.2.3) 4

Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.3.1)

Orotate phosphoribosyltransferase (EC 2.4.2.10)

Orotidine monophosphate decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.23)

**TMP** *(from dUMP):*

Thymidylate synthase (EC 2.1.1.45)

**CTP**: *(from UTP):*

CTP synthase (EC 6.3.4.2)

**IMP** *(from PRPP):*

Glutamine phosphoribosyl amidotransferase (EC 2.4.2.14)

Glycinamide ribonucleotide synthetase (EC 6.3.4.13)

GAR transformylase (EC 2.1.2.2)

FGAM synthetase (EC 6.3.5.3)

Aminoimidazole ribonucleotide synthetase (EC 6.3.3.1)

Aminoimidazole ribonucleotide carboxylase (EC 4.2.1.1)

SAICAR synthetase (EC 6.3.2.6)

Adenylosuccinate lyase (EC 4.3.2.2)

AICAR transformylase (EC 2.1.2.3)

IMP cyclohydrolase (EC 3.5.4.10)

**AMP** *(from IMP):*

Adenylosuccinate synthetase (EC 6.3.4.4)

Adenylosuccinate lyase (EC 4.3.2.2)

**GMP** *(from IMP):*

IMP dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.205)

GMP synthetase (EC 6.3.5.2)

**Deoxyribonucleotides**:

Ribonucleotide reductase (EC 1.17.4.1)

**<u>Nucleotide degradation</u>**

**Cytidine** *(to uridine):*

Cytidine deaminase (EC 3.5.4.5)

**Uridine** *(to malonyl CoA):*

Uridine phosphorylase (EC 2.4.2.3)

Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.1.2)

Dihydropyrimidase (EC 3.5.2.2)

β-ureidopropionase (EC 3.5.1.6)

**Thymidine** *(to succinyl CoA):*

Thymidine phosphorylase (EC 2.4.2.4)

Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.1.2)

Dihydropyrimidase (EC 3.5.2.2)

β-ureidopropionase (EC 3.5.1.6)

**Adenosine** *(to uric acid):*

Adenosine deaminase (EC 3.5.4.4)

Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (EC 2.4.2.1)

Xanthine oxidase (EC 1.17.1.4; EC 1.17.3.2)

**Guanosine** *(to uric acid):*

Purine nucleoside phosphorylase (EC 2.4.2.1)

Guanine deaminase (EC 3.5.4.3)

Xanthine oxidase (EC 1.17.1.4; EC 1.17.3.2)

**<u>  
Amino acid biosynthesis</u>**

**Alanine** *(from pyruvate):*

Alanine transaminase (EC 2.6.1.2)

### Alanine racemase (PLP-dependent) (EC 5.1.1.1) 

**Aspartate** *(from oxaloacetate):*

Aspartate transaminase (EC 2.6.1.1)

**Glutamate** *(from α-ketoglutarate):*

Glutamate transaminase (EC 2.6.1.1)

**Glutamine** *(from glutamate):*

Glutamine synthase (EC 6.3.1.2)

**Asparagine** *(from aspartate):*

Asparagine synthase (EC 6.3.5.4)

**Arginine** *(from glutamate via ornithine):*

N-acetylglutamate synthase (EC 2.3.1.1)

Acetylglutamate kinase (EC 2.7.2.8)

*N-*acetyl-γ-glutamyl-phosphate reductase (1.2.1.38)

Acetylornithine transaminase (EC 2.6.1.11)

Acetylornithine deacetylase (EC 3.5.1.16)

*then ornithine to arginine via urea cycle*

### Proline *(from glutamate):*

### Glutamate-5-kinase (EC 2.7.2.11) 

### Glutamate-5-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.41) 

### Pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase (EC 1.5.1.2) 

**Serine** *(from 3-phosphoglycerate):*

Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.95)

Phosphoserine transaminase (EC 2.6.1.52)

Phosphoserine phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.3)

### Cysteine *(from serine):*

### Cystathionine β-synthase (EC 4.2.1.22) 

Cystathionine γ-lyase (EC 4.4.1.1)

*. . . or (in bacteria) :*

### O-acetylserine sulfhydrolase (EC 2.5.1.47) 

### 

### 

###  Glycine *(from serine):*

Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (EC 2.1.2.1)

### 

**Lysine** *(from aspartate):*

Aspartate kinase (EC 2.7.2.4) P16.3

Aspartate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.11)

Dihydrodipicolinate synthase (EC 4.2.1.52)

Dihydrodipicolinate reductase (EC 1.3.1.26)

Tetrahydropyridine-2-carboxylate *N*-succinyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.117)

Succinyl-diaminopimelate transaminase (EC 2.6.1.17)

### Succinyl-diaminopimelate desuccinylase (EC 3.5.1.18) 

### Diaminopimelate decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.20) 

### 

### Methionine (*from aspartate* via *homoserine):*

Aspartate kinase (EC 2.7.2.4)

Aspartate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.11)

### Homoserine dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.3) 

### Homoserine transsuccinylase (EC 2.3.1.46) 

### Cystathionine -synthase (EC 4.2.1.22) 

Cystathionine β-lyase (EC 4.4.1.8)

Methionine synthase (EC 2.1.1.13)

### 

**Threonine** *(from homoserine):*

Homoserine kinase (EC 2.7.1.39)

Threonine synthase (EC 4.2.3.1)

**Isoleucine, leucine, valine** *(from pyruvate):*

Acetolactate synthase (EC 2.2.1.6)

Ketol acid reductoisomerase (EC 1.1.1.86)

Dihydroxyacid dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.9)

**Isoleucine**:

Branched-chain-amino-acid transaminase (EC 2.6.1.42)

**Valine**:

Valine—pyruvate transaminase (EC 2.6.1.66)

**Leucine**:

2-isopropylmalate synthase (EC 2.3.3.13)

Isopropylmalate isomerase (EC 4.2.1.33)

3-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.85

Leucine transaminase (EC 2.6.1.6)

**  
Aromatic amino acids**

> ***Erythrose-4P to chorismate***:
>
> DAHP synthase (EC 2.5.1.54)
>
> Dehydroquinate synthase (EC 4.2.3.4)
>
> Dehydroquinate dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.10)
>
> Shikimate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.25)
>
> shikimate kinase (EC 2.7.1.71) P10.2
>
> 5-enolpyruvylshikimate-3-phosphate (EPSP) synthase (EC 2.5.1.19)
>
> Chorismate synthase (EC 4.2.3.5)
>
> ***Chorismate to tryptophan***:
>
> Anthranilate synthase (EC 4.1.3.27)
>
> Anthranilate phosphoribosyltransferase (EC 2.4.2.18)
>
> Phosphoribosyl anthranilate isomerase (EC 5.3.1.24)
>
> Indole-3-glycerol phosphate synthase (EC 4.1.1.48)
>
> Tryptophan synthase (EC 4.2.1.20)
>
> ***Chorismate to phenylalanine/tyrosine***
>
> Chorismate mutase (EC 5.4.99.5)
>
> Prephenate decarboxylase (EC 4.2.1.51)
>
> Aromatic-amino-acid transaminase (EC 2.6.1.57)
>
> Tyrosine transaminase (EC 2.6.1.5)

### 

### Histidine *(from PRPP and ATP):*

### 

### ATP phosphoribosyltransferase (EC 2.4.2.17) 

### Phosphoribosyl-ATP diphosphatase (EC 3..6.1.31) 

### Phosphoribosyl-AMP cyclohydrolase (EC 3.5.4.19) 

1-(5-phosphoribosyl)-5-\[(5-phosphoribosylamino)methylideneamino\]imidazole-4-carboxamide
isomerase (EC 5.3.1.16)

### Imidazole glycerol-phosphate synthase (EC 4.3.1.B2) 

### Imidazoleglycerol-phosphate dehydratase (4.2.1.19) 

### Histidinol-phosphate transaminase (EC 2.6.1.9) 

### Histidinol-phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.15) 

### Histidinol dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.23) 

### 

### 

### 

**<u>  
Amino acid degradation</u>**

Transaminase (EC 2.6.1.1, EC 2.6.1.2)

Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (EC 6.3.4.16)

**Urea cycle**

Ornithine transcarbamylase (EC 2.1.3.3)

Argininosuccinate synthetase (EC 6.3.4.5)

Arginosuccinate lyase (EC 4.3.2.1)

Arginase (EC 3.5.3.1)

**Alanine** *(to pyruvate and glutamate):*

Alanine transaminase (EC 2.6.1.2)

**Serine**

*to pyruvate:*

Serine dehydratase (EC 4.3.1.17)

*to glycine:*

Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (EC 2.1.2.1)

**Glycine** *(glycine cleavage system):*

Glycine dehydrogenase (decarboxylating) (EC 1.4.4.2)

Aminomethyltransferase (EC 2.1.2.10)

**Cysteine** *(to pyruvate and SO<sub>2</sub>):*

Cysteine dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.20)

Aspartate transaminase (2.6.1.1)

**Threonine**

> ***pathway 1*** *(to glycine and acetyl CoA):*
>
> Threonine dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.103)
>
> Glycine C-acetyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.29)
>
> ***pathway 2*** *(to glycine and acetaldehyde):*
>
> Threonine aldolase (EC 4.1.2.5)
>
> ***pathway*** 3 *(to succinyl-CoA via propionyl CoA):*
>
> Threonine dehydratase (EC 4.3.1.19)
>
> 2-oxobutanoate dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.4.4)
>
> Propionyl-CoA carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.3)
>
> Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (EC 5.4.99.2)

**  
Tryptophan** *(to glutaryl-CoA):*

Tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.11)

Acylformamidase (EC 3.5.1.19)

Kynurenine 3-monooxygenase (EC 1.14.13.9)

Kynurenimase (EC 3.7.1.3)

3-hydroxyanthranilate 3,4-dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.6)

Aminocarboxymuconate-semialdehyde decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.45)

2-aminomuconate semialdehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.32)

2-aminomuconate deaminase (EC 3.5.99.5)

2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.4.2)

**Asparagine** *(to aspartate):*

Asparaginase (EC 3.5.1.1)

**Aspartate**

***to oxaloacetate***:

Aspartate transaminase (EC 2.6.1.1)

***to fumarate:***

Aspartate-ammonia lyase (EC 4.3.1.1)

**Glutamine** *(to glutamate):*

Glutaminase (EC 3.5.1.2)

**Glutamate** (*to α-ketoglutarate*):

Glutamate dehydrogenase (EC 1.4.1.2)

**Arginine** *(to glutamate):*

Arginase (EC 3.5.3.1)

Ornithine transaminase (EC 2.6.1.13)

Glutamate semialdehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.41)

**Histidine** *(to glutamate):*

Histidine ammonia-lyase (EC 4.3.1.3)

Urocanate hydratase (EC 4.2.1.49)

Imidazolonepropionase (EC 3.5.2.7)

Formimidoylglutamase (EC 3.5.3.8)

**  
Valine, isoleucine, leucine:**

Banched chain amino acid transaminase (EC 2.6.1.42)

Branched chain ketoacid dehydrogenase complex (EC 1.2.4.4)

Acyl CoA dehydrogenase (eg. EC 1.3.99.13)

> ***Valine** (to succinyl CoA):*
>
> Enoyl-CoA hydratase (EC 4.2.1.17)
>
> 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase (EC 3.1.2.4)
>
> 3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.31)
>
> Methylmalonate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (1.2.1.27)
>
> Propionyl-CoA carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.3)
>
> Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (EC 5.4.99.2)
>
> ***Isoleucine** (to succinyl CoA and acetyl CoA)*
>
> Enoyl-CoA hydratase (EC 4.2.1.17)
>
> Methyl-hydroxybutyryl CoA dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.178)
>
> 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase (EC 2.3.1.16)
>
> Propionyl-CoA carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.3
>
> Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (EC 5.4.99.2)
>
> ***Leucine** (to acetyl CoA)*
>
> Methylcrotonoyl-CoA carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.4)
>
> Methylglutaconyl-CoA hydratase (EC 4.2.1.18)
>
> Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA lyase (EC 4.1.3.4)

**Methionine** *(to cysteine and succinyl-CoA):*

Methionine adenosyltransferase (EC 2.5.1.6)

Methyltransferase (eg. 2.1.1.37)

Adenosylhomocysteinase (EC 3.3.1.1)

### Cystathionine beta-synthase (EC 4.2.1.22) 

Cystathionine gamma-lyase (EC 4.4.1.1)

2-oxobutanoate dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.4.4)

Propionyl-CoA carboxylase (EC 6.4.1.3)

Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (EC 5.4.99.2)

**Lysine** *(to glutaryl-CoA):*

Saccharopine dehydrogenase (EC 1.5.1.8)

Saccharopine reductase (EC 1.5.1.10)

Aminoadipate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.31)

2-aminoadipate transaminase (EC2.6.1.39)

2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.4.2)

**  
Phenylalanine** *(to tyrosine):*

Phenylalanine hydroxylase (EC 1.14.16.1)

**Tyrosine** *(to fumarate and acetoacetate):*

Tyrosine transaminase (EC 2.6.1.5)

4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.27)

Homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.5)

Maleylacetoacetate isomerase (EC 5.2.1.2)

Fumarylacetoacetase (EC 3.7.1.2)

Appendix II: Review of core mechanism types

As you work through the chapters in the second half of this book, you
should be sure that you can recognize and draw general examples of all
of the following core mechanism types.

Section 8.1: Nucleophilic substitution: S<sub>N</sub>1 and
S<sub>N</sub>2

Section 9.2: Phosphate transfer

Section 10.2:

Formation of hemiacetal/hemiketal

Collapse of hemiacetal/hemiketal

Section 10.3:

Formation of acetal/ketal

Hydrolysis of acetal/ketal

Section 10.4: *N*-glycosidic bond formation and hydrolysis

Section 10.5: Imine formation and hydrolysis

Section 11.2 Nucleophilic acyl substitution at carboxylic acid
derivatives

Section 11.8: Nucleophilic substitution at activated amides and
carbamides

Section 12.2:

Carbonyl regioisomerization

Racemization/epimerization at α-carbon

Alkene regioisomerization

Section 12.3: Aldol addition / retroaldol cleavage

Section 13.1: Decarboxylation

Section 13.3: Claisen condensation / retro-Claisen cleavage

Section 13.4:

Conjugate (Michael) addition

E1cb β-elimination

Section 13.5: Carboxylation

Section 14.1: Electrophilic addition to alkene

Section 14.2: E1 β-elimination

Section 14.3: Electrophilic isomerization

Section 14.4: Electrophilic substitution

Section 14.5: Carbocation rearrangement

Section 15.3:

Hydrogenation aldehyde/ketone/imine by NAD(P)H

Dehydrogenation of alcohol/amine by NAD(P)<sup>+</sup>

Section 15.4:

Hydrogenation of conjugated alkene by NAD(P)H or FADH<sub>2</sub>

Dehydrogenation of alkane by FAD

Section 15.6: Disulfide exchange

Section 16.2: Radical chain reactions
