# Chapter 6: Overview of organic reactivity

<img src="media/image493.jpg" style="width:5.05987in;height:3.375in" />

**A hot spring in Yellowstone National Park**

(Credit: https://www.flickr.com/photos/pavdw)

**Introduction**

September 5, 1966, turned out to be a very good day for Hudson Freeze.
An undergraduate microbiology major at Indiana University, he was a few
weeks away from the first day of classes in his junior year, but on this
September day he was far away from the oppressive heat and humidity of
late summer in the midwest. Instead, he was working at the edge of
Mushroom Spring in Yellowstone National Park, one of one of the many
geothermal hot springs for which the park is so famous.

At the end of his sophomore year, Freeze had approached Dr. Thomas
Brock, one of his microbiology professors, to ask about the possibility
of working as a research assistant over the summer. Brock took him up on
the offer, inviting him to come out to Yellowstone for a few weeks in
late summer to help with some fieldwork.

For the past few years, Brock had been studying microbes that inhabited
the hot springs: these 'extremophile' organisms were fascinating to him
because they appeared to thrive in conditions that until quite recently
had been thought to be too hot to support life. The currently accepted
upper limit at which life was believed to be possible was 73
<sup>o</sup>C, but during his work in Yellowstone the previous summer
Brock was convinced that he had observed microbial life – a pink
colored, filamentous bacteria - in water as hot as 88 <sup>o</sup>C.
Unfortunately, all of his attempts to culture these life forms in the
lab had been unsuccessful. He had decided to focus his efforts this
summer on Mushroom Spring, where the water was 73 <sup>o</sup>C, right
at the supposed limit for life, and assigned Freeze the task of
collecting microbial samples from the waters of the spring. On September
5, Freeze collected a promising-looking sample, which he took back to a
makeshift lab in Brock's cabin to prepare for transport back to Indiana.

A few weeks later, working in his professor's lab in between classes and
homework, Freeze was engaged in the challenge of figuring out how to get
his microbes to grow outside their natural environment, so that he could
isolated and eventually characterize them. The work was frustrating at
first – attempting to get the bacterial to grow in a liquid medium, he
never observed the characteristic turbidity that usually signals
success. In some samples, however, he did observe the appearance of salt
crystals on the bottom of the test tubes. He allowed these samples to
incubate for a few more days, and noticed that more crystals had formed.
Just to be thorough, he decided to look at some of the crystals under a
microscope – and hit the jackpot. Clinging to the crystals themselves
were the recognizable shapes of microbial cells.

In subsequent work with Thomas Brock, Freeze was able to improve his
culturing techniques and characterize the new species of bacterium,
which was later named *Thermus aquaticus,* or *'Taq'* for short*.* He
also was able to demonstrate that enzymes isolated from the bacterium
remained intact and active even in boiling water.

Even though Yellowstone is a beautiful place to spend a few weeks in the
summer doing field work, it turned out that making the trip to Wyoming
was not really necessary – Thomas Brock later was able to isolate
cultures of *Taq* from samples taken from the hot water system right
there on the Indiana University campus, as well as from many other
hot-water environments around the world. Brock and Freeze went on to
publish a paper in the *Journal of Bacteriology* *(***1969**, *98*, 289)
describing their newly discovered species, and donated live cultures of
*Taq* to the American Type Culture Collection, a biological repository
in Washington D.C.

Years later, a scientist named Kary Mullis working at Cetus, a
biotechnology firm in the San Francisco Bay area, purchased a culture of
*Taq* - a direct descendent of the very culture that Hudson Freeze had
taken from Mushroom Spring on September 5, 1966 - from the ATCC
repository. Cetus paid \$35 for the sample. It turned out to be a pretty
good investment.

Mullis and his colleagues at Cetus were intrigued by Freeze's report
years earlier that enzymes isolated from *Taq* were stable at high
temperatures, unlike enzymes isolated from *E. coli* and other common
model organisms. They cultured their *Taq* sample, purified the
DNA-copying enzyme DNA polymerase from the *Taq* cells, and using the
heat-stable polymerase were able to come up with a remarkably efficient
method for copying short stretches of DNA. Their 'polymerase chain
reaction', or PCR, went on to revolutionize the fields of
molecular/cellular biology and biochemistry – read through the
experimental section of any recent research paper in one of these fields
and chances are you will see that the researchers used PCR. If you take
a lab course in molecular biology, you will probably perform at least
one PCR procedure. When your professor purchases the purified *Taq*
polymerase enzyme and other reagents for your lab, part of the price
will go towards paying royalty fees to the pharmaceutical giant
Hoffmann-LaRoche: Kary Mullis and Cetus obtained a patent for their PCR
process, and in 1992 sold patent rights to Hoffmann-LaRoche for \$300
million. Mullis was awarded the 1993 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his
work on PCR.

What makes the PCR technique so powerful is that it harnesses a
biological catalyst - the DNA polymerase enzyme naturally produced by
the *Taq* microbe - to vastly increase the rate of a very specific and
very useful chemical reaction, under environmental conditions (high
temperature) that until then had been fatal for other enzymes. *Taq*
polymerase, the \$300 million molecule, is the most visible example (for
now!) of how scientists might harness the power of biological catalysis
to great advantage, but many researchers are hard at work, in
Yellowstone and many other locations around the world, writing more
chapters in the story that was begun by Hudson Freeze and Thomas Brock
on a September day in 1966.

Up to this point, we have been focusing on the *structure* of organic
molecules: essentially, how these molecule are put together. Now our
focus shifts to the study of *reactivity*: what happens, in other words,
when covalent bonds within a molecule break and new covalent bonds form,
as molecule A is transformed into molecule B. The story of *Taq* and PCR
is centered around a biochemical reaction - the polymerization of DNA
starting with an existing DNA 'template'. We are about to begin our
exploration of chemical reactivity: how a reaction is depicted on paper,
whether it absorbs or releases energy, how fast it goes, and how a
catalyst might be able to make it go much faster.

In your previous college general chemistry and high school chemistry
courses (and perhaps in biology courses as well), you have no doubt seen
many different examples of chemical reactions. Most likely, these
reactions were depicted by chemical *equations*, showing the starting
materials (reactants) and the finished products connected by a 'reaction
arrow'. In most cases, the structures of reactants and products were not
considered - they were defined only by molecular formula and perhaps by
physical state (solid, liquid, gas, or solution). The reaction below,
showing the decomposition of dinitrogen pentoxide
(N<sub>2</sub>O<sub>5</sub>) to nitrogen dioxide and oxygen, is a
typical example of the 'equation' treatment of chemical reactivity which
you might have seen in your General Chemistry textbook.

N<sub>2</sub>O<sub>5 (s)</sub> → 2NO<sub>2 (g)</sub> + ½ O<sub>2
(g)</sub>

This way of talking about chemical reactions is perfectly adequate in
introductory chemistry classes, when fundamental chemical concepts like
stoichiometry, thermodynamics, and kinetics are being explained for the
first time. In organic chemistry, beginning with this chapter, we will
go much further. We will certainly review the important fundamental
concepts of thermodynamics and kinetics that you learned previously. But
in our discussion of organic reactivity, we will bring our understanding
of organic *structure* into the picture, and think about *how* reactions
take place: which bonds break, which bonds form, *why* a particular bond
breaks or forms, the order in which bond-breaking and bond-forming takes
place, and the nature of any intermediate species that might form during
the course of the reaction. We also will think about how catalysts -
enzymes in particular - are able to increase the rate of a particular
reaction. Taken together, a description of a chemical reaction at this
level is called a **reaction mechanism**. Beginning here, and continuing
throughout the rest of the text, our main job will be to understand the
mechanisms of the most important types of reactions undergone by organic
molecules in living organisms.

## Section 6.1: A first look at some reaction mechanisms

### 6.1A: An acid-base (proton transfer) reaction

We'll begin with a relatively simple type of reaction that you are no
doubt familiar with from previous chemistry classes: an acid-base
reaction. Note that in chapter 7, we will come back to consider
acid-base reactivity in much greater detail.

Here is the acid-base reaction between hydroxide ion and hydrochloric
acid:

<img src="media/image494.png"
style="width:2.61111in;height:0.47222in" />

Note: A reaction such as the one above would of course include a
spectator cation, such as sodium (Na<sup>+</sup>) or potassium
(K<sup>+</sup>). In most of the reaction figures that we'll see
throughout this book, the spectator ion is not shown in the interest of
simplicity.

A proton is transferred from HCl, the acid, to hydroxide ion, the base.
The product is water (the conjugate acid of hydroxide ion) and chloride
ion (the conjugate base of HCl).

Despite its simplicity (and despite the fact that the reactants and
products are *inorganic* rather than organic), this reaction allows us
to consider for the first time many of the fundamental ideas of organic
chemistry that we will be exploring in various contexts throughout this
text.

One very important key to understanding just about any reaction
mechanism is the concept of **electron density**, and how it is
connected to the **electron movement** (bond-breaking and bond-forming)
that occurs in a reaction. The hydroxide ion – specifically, the oxygen
atom bearing the negative formal charge – has high electron density: it
is **electron-rich**.

<img src="media/image495.png"
style="width:2.04074in;height:0.85926in" />

fig 1

The hydrogen atom in HCl, on the other hand, has low electron density:
it is **electron-poor**, because chlorine is more electronegative than
hydrogen. As you might expect, an atom that is electron-rich is likely
to be attracted to an atom that is electron-poor. As hydroxide and HCl
move closer to each other, a new bond forms between oxygen and hydrogen,
and the hydrogen-chlorine bond breaks. The end result is a water
molecule and a chloride anion.

In organic chemistry terms, a **reaction** **mechanism** is a formalized
description of how a reaction takes place - how we get, in other words,
from reactants to products. Previously (section 2.3) , we saw how
**curved arrows** were used to depict the ‘imaginary’ movement of two
electrons when illustrating the conversion between two resonance
contributors of the same molecule or ion (remember from that discussion
that the conversion between two resonance contributors is *not* a
reaction - it is merely an illustration of two different ways to draw
the same molecule). The same curved arrow convention is used in
**mechanism drawings** to show the electron movement that takes place in
chemical reactions, where bonds are actually broken and formed. The
mechanism for the HCl + OH<sup>-</sup> reaction, for example, can be
depicted by drawing two curved arrows.

<img src="media/image496.png"
style="width:3.50995in;height:0.94133in" />

fig 2

Arrow (a) in the mechanistic drawing originates at one of the lone pairs
on the hydroxide oxygen and points to the ‘H’ symbol in hydrochloric
acid, illustrating the ‘attack’ of the oxygen lone pair and subsequent
formation of a new hydrogen-oxygen bond. Arrow (b) originates at the
middle of hydrogen-chlorine bond and points to the ‘Cl’ symbol,
indicating that this bond is breaking: the two electrons that make the
bond are ‘leaving’ and becoming a lone pair on chloride ion. Always keep
in mind that these curved arrows by definition depict the movement of
*two* electrons. (When we study radical reactions in chapter 17, we will
see how to depict the movement of a single electron.)

When two (or more) curved arrows are drawn in the same figure of a
mechanism, the intended meaning is that the electron movements being
shown are occurring *simultaneously*. For example, in the figure above,
the electron movement illustrated by arrow (a) (O-H bond formation) is
occurring at the same time as the H-Cl bond breaking illustrated by
arrow (b).

The **transition state (TS)** of a chemical step is a point at which
bonds are in the process of breaking and/or forming. (More specifically,
we will see below when discussing energy diagrams that the transition
state is the point of *highest energy* in the chemical step). Transition
states are illustrated by drawing the forming/breaking bonds as dotted
lines, and are enclosed by brackets with the 'double-dagger' symbol. For
example, the transition state in the acid-base reaction between
hydroxide and HCl can be illustrated as:

<img src="media/image497.png"
style="width:5.46319in;height:1.36111in" />

fig 2a

Notice in the drawing above that both the oxygen and the chlorine bear
*partial* negative charges at the transition state: the formal charge on
oxygen changes from -1 to 0 during the course of the reaction step,
while the formal charge on chlorine changes from 0 to -1.

While it can sometimes be instructive to include a transition state
drawing in an organic mechanism diagram, they are not 'obligatory'
elements of such a diagram. When asked to draw a reaction mechanism in
the exercises and problems in this book, you need not include TS
drawings in your answer unless specifically directed to do so.

<u>Exercise</u> 6.1: Draw electron movement arrows to illustrate
mechanism of the acid-base reaction between acetic acid,
CH<sub>3</sub>CO<sub>2</sub>H, and ammonia, NH<sub>3</sub>. Draw out the
Lewis structures of reactants and products, including all lone pairs and
formal charges. Include a transition state drawing in your mechanism.

<u>Exercise 6.2</u>: Draw electron movement arrows to illustrate the
mechanism of the *reverse* of the reaction in Exercise 6.1: the
acid-base reaction between acetate ion
(CH<sub>3</sub>CO<sub>2</sub><sup>-</sup>, acting as a base) and
ammonium (NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup>), acting as an acid). Again, draw
out the Lewis structures of reactants and products, including all lone
pairs and formal charges.

### 6.1B: A one-step nucleophilic substitution reaction 

The reaction between hydroxide and HCl is a simple example of a Brønsted
acid-base (proton transfer) reaction. We now continue our introduction
to the essential ideas of organic reactivity with a different type of
reaction in which bonds to a *carbon* atom are rearranged. Consider what
might happen if a hydroxide ion encountered a chloromethane molecule.
The hydroxide is an electron-rich species, and thus might be expected to
act as a base and ‘attack’ a hydrogen as it did in the previous example
with hydrochloric acid. In this case, though, the three hydrogens on
chloromethane are not electron-poor, as they are bound not to chlorine
but to carbon, which is not very electronegative. However, there *is* a
relatively electron-poor atom in chloromethane: the carbon itself.

<img src="media/image498.png"
style="width:2.74097in;height:0.94444in" />

fig 3

Due to the relative electronegativity of chlorine, the carbon-chlorine
bond is polar. It stands to reason that a lone pair of electrons on the
electron-rich hydroxide oxygen will be attracted to the electron-poor
carbon nucleus.

<img src="media/image499.png"
style="width:3.51875in;height:0.69444in" />

fig 4

In the mechanism drawing above, curved arrow (a) shows the lone pair
electrons on the hydroxide oxygen moving to fill up an *sp<sup>3</sup>*
orbital on chloromethane, forming a new carbon-oxygen σ bond. However,
in order for this new bond to form, one of the bonds already on the
carbon must simultaneously break - otherwise, there will be five bonds
to carbon and the octet rule will be violated (remember that the 'octet
rule' tells us that elements in the second row of the periodic table can
have a maximum of eight valence electrons). Curved arrow (b) illustrates
how the two electrons in the carbon-chloride bond break out of their σ
bond and become a lone pair on the chloride ion product. In other words,
arrow (b) illustrates the breaking of the carbon-chlorine bond. (We will
see a transition state drawing for this reaction in chapter 8, when we
study this type of reaction mechanism in much greater detail).

The reaction mechanism illustrated above called a **nucleophilic
substitution**. The 'substitution' term is easy to understand: just
recognize how hydroxide *substitutes* for chlorine as the fourth bond to
the central carbon. The term 'nucleophilic' means 'nucleus-loving' and
refers to the electron-rich species, the hydroxide oxygen. This oxygen
is a **nucleophile**: it is electron-rich and attracted to the
electron-poor nucleus of the carbon atom, and 'attacks' with a lone pair
to form a new covalent bond.

There are two more terms that come into play here, both of which you
will see again and again as you continue to study organic reactions.
Because the carbon atom in methyl chloride is electron-poor, it is
attracted to anything that is electron rich - anything nucleophilic, in
other words. Thus, the carbon is referred to in this context as an
**electrophile**. The chlorine, because it leaves with two electrons to
become a chloride ion, is termed a **leaving group.**

<img src="media/image500.png"
style="width:3.51875in;height:1.33333in" />

fig 5

<u>Exercise 6.3:</u> In each of the nucleophilic substitution reactions
below, identify the nucleophile, electrophile, and leaving group, and
fill in the missing product.

<img src="media/image501.png"
style="width:5.40764in;height:3.16667in" />

fig 6

### 6.1C: A two-step nucleophilic substitution mechanism 

Reaction mechanisms describe not only the electron movement that occurs
in a chemical reaction, but also the *order* in which bond-breaking and
bond-forming events occur. Some nucleophilic substitution reactions, for
example, can occur by a two-step mechanism that is different from the
one-step mechanism we just saw between hydroxide ion and chloromethane.
Look, for example, at the substitution reaction between acetate ion and
2-chloro-2-methyl propane (common name *tert*-butyl chloride).

<img src="media/image502.png"
style="width:5.24097in;height:0.68542in" />

fig 7

Unlike the chloromethane plus hydroxide reaction, in which the
substitution process took place in a single, concerted step, it turns
out that this mechanism involves two separate steps. The leaving group,
chloride anion, leaves first, *before* the acetate nucleophile attacks.

<img src="media/image503.png"
style="width:4.58333in;height:2.77778in" />

fig 8

Because the central carbon (colored blue in the figure above) has lost
its share of the two electrons in what was the carbon-chlorine bond, it
is now positively charged. Recall from section 2.1C that we can picture
a carbocation as a planar, *sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized carbon center
with three bonds, an empty *p* orbital, and a full positive charge.

<img src="media/image504.png"
style="width:1.37986in;height:1.05556in" />

fig 8a

The carbocation is highly reactive, and does not exist for very long
before participating in a subsequent bond-forming event. In the language
of organic mechanisms, it is referred to as a **reaction**
**intermediate**.

With its empty *p* orbital, the carbocation intermediate is clearly
electron-poor, and thus is a powerful electrophile. The negatively
charged acetate ion is electron dense and a nucleophile, and as such is
strongly attracted to the carbocation electrophile. Attack by the
nucleophile results in a new carbon-oxygen σ bond and formation of the
substitution product.

We will have much more to say about nucleophilic substitutions,
nucleophiles, electrophiles, and leaving groups in chapter 8. The take
home message at this point, however, is simply that two reactions that
look quite similar in terms of the reactants and products can occur by
different mechanisms.

You can probably appreciate by now how essential it is to understand and
be able to work with curved arrows - it is something that will use
constantly during the remainder of your study of organic reactivity.

For example, although you are not yet familiar with the relevant
reaction mechanism (it is the HIV protease reaction, covered in chapter
11), given reactant and intermediate structures:

<img src="media/image505.png"
style="width:5.26875in;height:1.44444in" />

fig 8b

with practice you should at this point be able to recognize the
bond-forming and bond-breaking electron movement that is taking place,
and draw the appropriate curved arrows:

<img src="media/image506.png"
style="width:2.33333in;height:1.40764in" />

fig 8c

An additional word of caution: many beginning organic students make the
mistake of using curved arrows to depict the motion of *atoms*. This is
incorrect! The curved arrows in an organic mechanism ***always*** refer
to the motion of *electrons*.

## Section 6.2: A brief review of thermodynamics and kinetics

You may recall from general chemistry that it is often convenient to
illustrate the energetics of a chemical reaction with a **reaction
coordinate diagram**. In a reaction coordinate diagram, the vertical
axis represents the overall potential energy of the reactants, while the
horizontal axis is the ‘reaction coordinate’, tracing from left to right
the progress of the reaction from starting reactants R to final products
P. (Many students find it helpful to envision the horizontal axis in an
reaction coordinate diagram as being analogous to the progress bar at
the bottom of a youtube vieo). The diagram for a typical one-step
nucleophilic substitution reaction such as that between hydroxide and
methyl chloride might look like this:

<img src="media/image507.png"
style="width:3.79653in;height:3.57431in" />

fig 9

Despite its apparent simplicity, this diagram conveys some very
important ideas about the thermodynamics and kinetics of the reaction.
Recall that when we talk about the **thermodynamics** of a reaction, we
are concerned primarily with the difference in energy between reactants
(R) and products (P): whether the reaction as a whole is uphill or
downhill. When we talk about **kinetics**, on the other hand, we are
concerned with the *rate* of the reaction: how fast it goes from
reactants to products, regardless of whether that transformation is
energetically uphill or downhill.

### 6.2A: Thermodynamics

First, a quick review of some key thermodynamics terms (you may also
want to go back to your General Chemistry text for a more complete
review). Recall that the **standard** **Gibbs free-energy change of a
reaction (∆G˚)** is the difference in energy between reactants and
products at standard conditions. Gibbs free-energy change is a
combination of enthalpy change (∆H<sup>o</sup>) and entropy change
(∆S<sup>o</sup>):

∆G = ∆H<sup>o</sup> - T∆S<sup>o</sup>

. . .where T is the temperature in Kelvin (recall that the Kelvin
temperature is simply the Celsius temperature plus 273.15).

**Enthalpy change (∆H<sup>o</sup>)** is the heat released or absorbed by
the reaction.

**Entropy change (∆S<sup>o</sup>)** is the change in disorder from
reactants to products. In a reaction in which one molecule cleaves into
two smaller molecules, for example, disorder increases, so
(∆S<sup>o</sup>) is positive.

The **equilibrium constant (K<sub>eq</sub>)** for a reaction is an
expression of the relative concentrations of reactants and products
*after the reaction has reached equilibrium*. The equilibrium constant
is defined as:

<img src="media/image508.png"
style="width:4.44444in;height:1.86111in" />

fig 9a

Now, let’s review what the above energy diagram tells us about the
thermodynamics of the reaction. Note that the energy level of the
products is *lower* than that of the reactants. This tells us that the
Gibbs free-energy change for the reaction is negative, and the step is
**exergonic**, or energy releasing. We can also say the reaction is
'thermodynamically favorable', or, more informally, 'downhill'.

Recall from General Chemistry that the standard Gibbs free energy change
for a reaction can be related to the reaction's equilibrium constant
(K<sub>eq</sub>) by the equation:

∆G˚ = -RT lnK<sub>eq</sub>

. . . where R is the gas constant (8.314 J/mol⋅K) and T is the
temperature in Kelvin (K).

If you do the math, you see that a negative value for ∆G˚<sub>rnx</sub>
(an exergonic reaction) corresponds to K<sub>eq</sub> being greater than
1, an equilibrium constant which favors product formation.

Conversely, an **endergonic** reaction is one in which the products are
higher in energy than the reactants, and energy is absorbed. An
endergonic reaction has a positive value of ∆G˚<sub>rnx</sub>, and a
K<sub>eq</sub> between 0 and 1.

<img src="media/image509.png"
style="width:3.55556in;height:2.30556in" />

fig 9b

Acid-base reactions provide convenient examples of thermodynamically
favorable and unfavorable reactions. The reaction of a strong acid like
HCl with a strong base like hydroxide ion, for example, is highly
favorable, and has an equilibrium constant much greater than one. The
reaction of a weak acid such as acetic acid with a weak base such as
water, on the other hand, is unfavorable and has an equilibrium constant
that is a very small (much less than 1) positive number: we can
visualize this in a reaction coordinate diagram as an 'uphill' reaction,
in which ∆G˚<sub>rnx</sub> is positive.

When talking about exergonic, or 'downhill' reactions, chemists
sometimes use the term **'driving force'** to describe the chemical
factor or factors that drive the reaction from higher energy reactant to
lower energy product. Using the 'downhill' analogy again, when water
flows downhill, the driving force is gravity. In an exergonic chemical
reaction, the driving force generally is based on a combination of two
factors: a) the stability of positive and negative charges in the
product relative to those in the reactant, and b) the total bond energy
in the product relative to the reactant. That may not make a lot of
sense right now, but keep it in the back of your mind and we will come
back to the idea of driving force when we study different reaction types
in greater detail.

Now, let's move to kinetics. Look again at the diagram for an exergonic
reaction: although it is ‘downhill’ overall, it isn’t a straight
downhill run.

<img src="media/image510.png"
style="width:3.55556in;height:2.68542in" />

fig 9c

First, an ‘energy barrier’ must be overcome to get to the product side.
The height of this energy barrier is called the **standard free energy
of activation (**∆G˚<sup>‡</sup>**)**. The activation energy, in
combination with the temperature at which the reaction is being run,
determines the rate of a reaction: the higher the activation energy, the
slower the reaction. At the very top of the energy barrier, the reaction
is at its **transition state** (TS), which you should recall is defined
as the highest energy structure in the transition from reactant to
product.

Consider the hypothetical reaction coordinate diagrams below.

<img src="media/image511.png" style="width:6in;height:2.71552in" />

Both reaction A and reaction B are slightly endergonic, or uphill:
∆G˚<sub>rxn</sub> for both is positive, meaning that K<sub>eq</sub> for
both is between 0 and 1. However, the energy of activation is higher for
reaction B. From this observation, we know that reaction A will proceed
faster than reaction B in both forward and reverse directions
(temperature and other conditions being equal), so reaction A will reach
equilibrium in less time.

<u>Exercise 6.4</u>: Consider the hypothetical reaction coordinate
diagrams below, and assume that they are on the same scale.

<img src="media/image512.png" style="width:4.5in;height:4.10208in" />

fig 9d

a)Which of the diagrams describe(s) a reaction with K<sub>eq</sub> \< 1
?

b\) Which of the diagrams describes the fastest reaction?

c\) Which of the diagrams describes the reaction with the highest value
of K<sub>eq</sub>?

d\) Which of the diagrams describes the reaction with the largest
∆G˚<sup>‡</sup> for the *reverse* reaction?

e\) Copy the diagram for your answer to part (d), and add a label which
graphically illustrates the value of ∆G˚<sup>‡</sup> for the reaction in
the *reverse* direction.

We turn our attention next to a two-step reaction mechanism, such as the
nucleophilic substitution reaction between acetate and *tert*-butyl
chloride. The reaction coordinate diagram for this reaction looks
somewhat different from what we have seen until now:

<img src="media/image513.png"
style="width:5.08333in;height:1.71319in" />

<img src="media/image514.png"
style="width:3.54653in;height:2.44444in" />

fig 10

Because there are two steps involved, there are also two transition
states and two activation energies to consider, as well as a carbocation
intermediate (denoted by the letter I). The first, bond-breaking step
from R to I, passing over transition state TS<sub>1</sub>, can be
depicted as a highly endergonic (uphill) reaction, because the
carbocation-chloride ion pair is significantly higher in energy than the
reactants. The second step, attack on the carbocation electrophile by
the acetate nucleophile and formation of the new carbon-oxygen bond, is
a highly exergonic step that passes over a second, lower energy
transition state TS<sub>2</sub>. The intermediate (I) is thus depicted
as an energy 'valley' (a local energy minimum) situated between the two
energy peaks TS<sub>1</sub> and TS<sub>2</sub>.

Notice that the activation energy for the first step is higher than the
activation energy for the second, meaning that the first step is slower.
This should make intuitive sense, because the first step involves
bond-breaking, separation of charge, and formation of a carbocation,
which is high in energy due to lacking a complete octet. Conversely, the
second step involves bond-forming and neutralization of charge. In a
multi-step reaction, the slowest step - the step with the highest energy
of activation - is referred to as the **rate-determining step** (rds).
The rds can be thought of as the 'bottleneck' of the reaction: a factor
which affects the rds will affect the overall rate of the reaction.
Conversely, a factor which affects a much faster step will not
significantly affect the rate of the overall reaction.

<u>Exercise 6.5</u>: Imagine that you are trying to extinguish a burning
campfire using buckets of water filled from a faucet some distance from
the fire. It takes 20 seconds to fill a bucket at the faucet, and two
seconds to carry the bucket to the fire and dump it on the flames. You
have plenty of people to carry the buckets, but only one faucet so you
can only fill one bucket at a time.

a\) If you double the speed at which you carry the buckets by running
instead of walking, what effect will this have on how fast you get water
to the fire?

b\) If, instead, you realize you can double the speed at which you fill
up the buckets by using a second faucet, what effect will this have on
how fast you get water to the fire?

c\) What is the rate-determining step for the process?

<u>Exercise 6.6</u>: Use the reaction coordinate diagram below to answer
the questions.

<img src="media/image515.png" style="width:4.08333in;height:2.75in" />

fig 10a

a\) Is the overall reaction endergonic or exergonic in the forward (A to
D) direction?

b\) How many steps does the reaction mechanism have?

c\) How many intermediates does the reaction mechanism have?

d\) Redraw the diagram and add a label showing the activation energy for
the rate-determining step of the forward reaction.

e\) Add a label showing ∆G<sup>o</sup><sub>rxn</sub> for the *reverse*
reaction (D to A).

f\) What is the fastest reaction step, considering *both* the forward
and reverse directions?

**  
**

## Section 6.3: Catalysis 

Consider a hypothetical reaction R → P described by the diagram below.

<img src="media/image516.png"
style="width:2.55556in;height:2.35208in" />

fig 10a

We notice two things about this reaction: it is exergonic, and it has a
high activation energy. What this means is that although it is
thermodynamically favorable, it is also slow: in other words,
equilibrium favors product over reactants, but it will take a long time
to reach equilibrium.

There are three ways that we could increase the rate of the reaction.
First, we could add energy to the system by increasing the temperature,
which gives the reacting molecules more energy to pass over the
transition state. Increasing the temperature will increase the value of
the rate constant *k* in the rate expression:

rate = *k* \[R\]

In the laboratory, many organic reactions are run at high temperatures
for this very purpose. We could also increase the concentration of the
reaction R, which would increase the rate of the reaction without
increasing the value of *k*.

When talking about the biochemical reactions happening in a living cell,
however, increasing the reaction temperature or reactant concentration
is not a reasonable option. As an alternative, we could provide a *new
route* from point R to point P in which the activation energy is lower.
The role of a **catalyst** is to accelerate a reaction by stabilizing
the transition state, and thus lowering the activation energy.

<img src="media/image517.png"
style="width:3.15764in;height:2.35208in" />

fig 10c

Catalysts, while they participate in the mechanism, are not consumed, so
one catalyst molecule can catalyze multiple reaction cycles. Notice also
that while the catalyst lowers the energy of the transition state (and
thus the activation energy), it has no effect on ∆G<sub>rxn</sub>. ***A
catalyst increases the rate of a reaction, but does not get consumed in
the reaction and does not alter the equilibrium constant***. In other
words, a catalyst affects the *kinetics* of a reaction, but not the
*thermodynamics*. Catalysts play a hugely important role in biochemical
reactions.

Most organic reactions involve more than a single mechanistic step.
Below is a reaction coordinate diagram illustrating rate acceleration of
a two-step reaction by a catalyst:

<img src="media/image518.png" style="width:3.83333in;height:2.5in" />

Notice that the catalyst lowers the energy of the intermediate species.
A concept known as the **Hammond Postulate** (the details of which are
beyond our scope here) tells us that ***when a catalyst lowers the
energy of an intermediate, it also lowers the energy of the adjacent
transition states.*** Note in this diagram above that the energy barrier
for the rate-determining first step is much lower in the catalyzed
reaction - thus, the overall reaction is faster. When studying how an
enzyme catalyzes a biochemical reaction, chemists often are actually
looking at how the enzyme interacts with - and stabilizes - an
intermediate species following a rate-determining step. The Hammond
postulate tells us that an understanding of enzyme-*intermediate*
interactions will also apply to enzyme-*transition state* interactions.

fig 10d

Acids and bases as are commonly used as catalysts in organic chemistry,
and chemists have come up with a huge arsenal of catalysts, many of them
metals, to speed up the rates of useful laboratory reactions. Almost all
biochemical reactions are catalyzed by **enzymes**, which are protein
catalysts. In the introduction to this chapter, we heard the story of
the discovery of a heat-stable DNA polymerizing enzyme which turned out
to be very useful to the scientific world.

How do enzymes accomplish their role as biochemical catalysts? Recall
from section 1.3D that enzymes have an active site pocket in which
substrates (reactant molecules) are bound. It is inside these active
site pockets that most biochemical reactions take place. Enzymes achieve
catalysis in the active site by some combination of the following:

I: By positioning two reacting molecules close to each other in the
active site, in precisely the orientation necessary for them to react.
Compare this to an uncatalyzed reaction in which completion depends on
the two reactant molecules happening to collide, by chance, in the
correct orientation.

II: By binding substrates in such a way that they assume the proper
conformation necessary for a reaction to occur.

III: By increasing the reactivity of the substrates: making acidic
protons more acidic, nucleophiles more nucleophilic, electrophiles more
electrophilic, and leaving groups better at leaving. Very often, these
feats are accomplished with acidic and/or basic amino acid side chains
lining the active site pocket. As we go on to study many different types
of biochemical reactions, we get a better of how this works.

IV: By stabilizing the transition states of the slower, rate-determining
steps of the reaction. If a transition state has a negative charge, for
example, the enzyme might provide a positively charged amino acid side
chain, or a bound metal cation such as Zn<sup>+2</sup>, as a stabilizing
factor. A lower-energy transition state, of course, means a lower
activation energy and a faster reaction step.

Enzymes are capable of truly amazing rate acceleration. Typical enzymes
will speed up a reaction by anywhere from a million to a billion times,
and the most efficient enzyme currently known to scientists is believed
to accelerate its reaction by a factor of about 10<sup>17</sup> over the
uncatalyzed reaction (see *Chemical and Engineering News*, March 13,
2000, p. 42 for an interesting discussion about this nucleotide
biosynthesis enzyme called 'orotidine monophosphate decarboxylase').

At this point, it is not necessary for you to fully understand the four
ideas listed above: just keep them in mind as we go on to study a
variety of common biological organic reactions and see in greater detail
how enzymes have evolved to catalyze them.

[Animated tutorial on how enzymes
work](https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=UUBkuiMC1rIybuTcyMK-jWKw&v=yk14dOOvwMk)

<u>Exercise 6.7</u>: Table sugar, or sucrose, is a high-energy dietary
compound, as are the fats in vegetable oil. Conversion of these
compounds, along with oxygen gas (O<sub>2</sub>), to water and carbon
dioxide releases a lot of energy. If they are both so high in energy (in
other words, thermodyamically *unstable*), how can they sit for years on
your kitchen shelf without reacting?

Another very important point to keep in mind about enzymes is the
*specificity* with which they catalyze reactions. We have already
discussed, in chapter 3, the idea that enzymes exert a very high level
of control over the stereochemistry of a reaction: if two or more
stereoisomeric products could potentially form in a reaction, an enzyme
will likely only catalyze the formation of one stereoisomer, with
negligible formation of other side products. Likewise, enzymes
demonstrate remarkable control of **regiochemistry** in their reactions.
The glycolysis pathway enzyme glucose-6-kinase, for example, transfers a
phosphate group specifically to the hydroxyl group on carbon \#6 of
glucose, and not to any of the other four hydroxyl groups. We'll look
more closely at this reaction and others like it in chapter 9.

<img src="media/image519.png" style="width:5.16667in;height:1.75in" />

fig 11

Finding ways to maintain control over stereochemistry and regiochemistry
is a constant challenge for synthetic organic chemists working with
non-enzymatic reactions, and the techniques that have been developed in
this arena are a big part of what you will study if you go on to take a
more advanced course focusing on organic synthesis.

Finally, we will encounter many biochemical reactions in this book in
which the enzyme catalyzing the reaction does so with the assistance of
a **coenzyme**. A coenzyme is a small (relative to a protein) molecule
that binds in the active site of a partner enzyme and participates in
some manner with the reaction being catalyzed. Table 6 at the back of
the book shows the structures of several coenzymes commonly seen in
biochemical reactions.

## Section 6.4: Comparing biological reactions to laboratory reactions 

The focus of this book is on organic chemistry in a biological context.
At various points in our investigation of organic reactivity, however,
we will also be considering some non-biological, laboratory counterparts
of reactions that occur in living cells. The reason for this is
two-fold: first of all, it is often instructive to compare and contrast
similar reactions taking place in very different environments, and
sometimes the similarities are quite striking. Secondly, even those who
intend to pursue a career in the life or health sciences can benefit
from some exposure to the kind of challenges that professional organic
or medicinal chemists work on: if you are working as a biologist for a
pharmaceutical company for example, you will be better able to
appreciate the contributions of your chemist colleagues if you are able
to make the intellectual connection between the reactions they are
running in flasks and the those that are taking place in the cells you
are studying.

Below we briefly outline the differences between laboratory and
biological reactions:

<u>Catalysts</u>: The vast majority of biological organic reactions are
catalyzed by enzymes. While chemists synthesizing molecules in the
laboratory sometimes make use of enzyme-catalyzed reactions, it is much
more common to use non-biological catalysts (often containing transition
metals), acids or bases as catalysts, or no catalyst at all.

<u>Solvent</u>: Biological organic reactions occur in the aqueous
environment of the cell. In the laboratory, organic reactions can be run
in a wide variety of solvents, ranging from the very nonpolar (such as
hexane) to the very polar, such as methanol,water, or even ionic
liquids. Most commonly, though, laboratory reactions are run in
relatively non-polar solvents such as diethyl ether or dichloromethane.

<u>Reactant mixture</u>: The aqueous environment of a cell is an
extremely complex mixture of thousands of different biomolecules in
solution at low concentrations (usually nanomolar to millimolar),
whereas the components of a laboratory reaction have usually been
purified, and are present in much higher concentrations.

<u>Temperature</u>: Biological reactions take place within a narrow
temperature range specific to the organism: a little too cold and the
enzymes catalyzing the reactions are 'frozen', a little too hot and the
enzymes will come unfolded, or 'denature'. Laboratory reactions can be
run at a variety of temperatures, sometimes at room temperature,
sometimes at the boiling point of the solvent, and sometimes at very low
temperatures (such as when a reaction flask is immersed in a dry
ice-acetone bath).

<u>pH</u>: Biological reactions take place in aqueous solution buffered
to a specific pH: about pH 7 for most living things. Accordingly, highly
acidic or basic species are unlikely to be reactants or intermediates in
a biological reaction mechanism. Laboratory reactions are often carried
out in the presence of strong acids or bases.

## Key concepts for review

You should be confident in interpreting and using the **curved arrow**
drawing convention for showing two-electron movement. Given a set of
curved arrows describing a reaction step, you should be able to draw the
product indicated by the arrows. Alternatively, given the starting
structure and a product for a reaction step, you should be able to draw
the curved arrows showing how bonds were broken and formed. You need not
understand (yet) the chemistry behind these steps, you just need to be
able to use the drawing formality.

You should be able to recognize three reaction mechanism types: an
**acid-base reaction,** a **one-step nucleophilic substitution**, and a
**two-step nucleophilic substitution**.

Given an example reaction, you should be able to identify a
**nucleophile**, **electrophile**, and in many cases a **leaving
group**.

Given an example reaction mechanism, you should be able to recognize one
or more **reaction intermediates**.

Given a reaction coordinate diagram for a hypothetical reaction, you
should be able to recognize whether the reaction is endergonic or
exergonic, and whether the equilibrium constant is greater than or less
than 1. You should be able to identify the point(s) on the diagram
corresponding to **transition state**(s**)** and reaction
intermediate(s). In a multi-step reaction diagram, you should be able to
identify the **rate determining step**.

Given a detailed reaction process showing starting reactant(s),
intermediate(s), and product(s) with associated curved arrows, you
should be able to sketch a reaction coordinate diagram that that is
consistent with the details of the reaction mechanism.

You should be able to explain the role of a **catalyst** in a reaction.

You should be able to list the major differences between a typical
biological reaction and a typical laboratory reaction.

## Problems

**P6.1:** For each of the nucleophilic substitution reactions below,
identify the atoms which are acting as nucleophile, electrophile, and
leaving group, and draw a curved-arrow diagram showing a *one-step*
mechanism.

a\)

<img src="media/image520.png"
style="width:4.55556in;height:0.54653in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image521.png"
style="width:4.65764in;height:0.90764in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image522.png"
style="width:4.54653in;height:0.49097in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image523.png" style="width:6in;height:1.5367in" />

**P6.2:** Below is a reaction coordinate diagram for a hypothetical
reaction.

a\) What can you say about the value of K<sub>eq</sub> for the overall A
to D transformation?

b\) What is the rate determining step for the overall A to D
transformation?

c\) Which step is faster, A to B or B to C?

d\) Which transformation is more thermodynamically favorable, A to B or
C to D?

<img src="media/image524.png"
style="width:4.50903in;height:3.15764in" />

e\) Below is a diagram of a hypothetical reaction. Step 2 is the
rate-determining step, C is the least stable species, B is higher energy
than D, and the overall reaction has an equilibrium constant
K<sub>eq</sub> = 0.33. Draw a diagram that corresponds to all of this
information.

<img src="media/image525.png"
style="width:2.55556in;height:0.33333in" />

**P6.3:** Illustrated below are individual steps in some biochemical
reaction mechanisms that we will be studying later. For each step, draw
the products or intermediate species that would form according to the
electron-movement arrows given. Be sure to include all formal charges.
You do not need to show stereochemistry.

a\)

<img src="media/image526.png"
style="width:2.63889in;height:0.96319in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image527.png"
style="width:3.30556in;height:1.55556in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image528.png"
style="width:1.24097in;height:1.12986in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image529.png"
style="width:2.26875in;height:1.54653in" />

e\)

<img src="media/image530.png"
style="width:2.21319in;height:1.38889in" />

**P6.4:** Shown below are individual steps in some biochemical reaction
mechanisms that we will be studying later. For each, draw curved arrows
showing the electron movement taking place.

a\)

<img src="media/image531.png"
style="width:4.68542in;height:1.85208in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image532.png" style="width:6in;height:1.34446in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image533.png"
style="width:4.69444in;height:2.08333in" />

**P6.5:**

a\) In the biochemical nucleophilic substitution reactions illustrated
below, identify the atoms which are acting as nucleophile, electrophile,
and leaving group.

Reaction 1:

<img src="media/image534.png"
style="width:5.76875in;height:3.32431in" />

Reaction 2:

<img src="media/image535.png" style="width:6in;height:2.02701in" />

b\) Using appropriate 'R' abbreviations for regions of the molecules
that are not directly involved in bond-breaking or bond-forming events
above, draw curved arrows showing the electron movement that takes place
in each step. Assume that both are one-step mechanisms.

