# Chapter 1: Introduction to organic structure and bonding, part I

<img src="media/image2.jpg" style="width:3.93125in;height:2.61082in" />

Figure : Habanero peppers

**Habanero peppers**

(credit: https://www.flickr.com/photos/jeffreyww/)

It's a hot August evening at a park in the middle of North Hudson,
Wisconsin, a village of just under 4000 people on the St. Croix river in
the western edge of the state. A line of people are seated at tables set
up inside a canvas tent. In front of a cheering crowd of friends,
family, and neighbors, these brave souls are about to do battle . .
.with a fruit plate.

Unfortunately for the contestants, the fruit in question is the
habanero, one of the hotter varieties of chili pepper commonly found in
markets in North America. In this particular event, teams of five people
will race to be the first to eat a full pound of peppers. As the eating
begins, all seems well at first. Within thirty seconds, though, what
begins to happen is completely predictable and understandable to anyone
who has ever mistakenly poured a little to much hot sauce on the dinner
plate. Faces turn red, sweat and tears begin to flow, and a copious
amount of cold water is gulped down.

Although technically the contestants are competing against each other,
the real opponent in this contest - the cause of all the pain and
suffering - is the chemical compound 'capsaicin', the source of the heat
in hot chili peppers.

<img src="media/image3.png" style="width:3.80556in;height:1.29653in" />

fig 1a

Composed of the four elements carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen,
capsaicin is produced by the pepper plant for the purpose of warding off
hungry mammals. The molecule binds to and activates a mammalian receptor
protein called TrpV1, which in normal circumstances has the job of
detecting high temperatures and sending a signal to the brain - 'it's
hot, stay away!' This strategy works quite well on all mammalian species
except one: we humans (some of us, at least) appear to be alone in our
tendency to seek out the burn of the hot pepper in our food.

Interestingly, birds also have a heat receptor protein which is very
similar to the TrpV1 receptor in mammals, but birds are not at all
sensitive to capsaicin. There is an evolutionary logic to this: it is to
the pepper's advantage to be eaten by a bird rather than a mammal,
because a bird can spread the pepper seeds over a much wider area. The
region of the receptor which is responsible for capsaicin sensitivity
appears to be quite specific - in 2002, scientists were able to insert a
small segment of the (capsaicin-sensitive) rat TrpV1 receptor gene into
the non-sensitive chicken version of the gene, and the resulting
chimeric (mixed species) receptor was sensitive to capsaicin (*Cell*
**2002**, *108*, 421).

Back at the North Hudson Pepperfest, those with a little more common
sense are foregoing the painful effects of capsaicin overload and are
instead indulging in more pleasant chemical phenomena. A little girl
enjoying an ice cream cone is responding in part to the chemical action
of another organic compound called vanillin.

<img src="media/image4.png" style="width:1.52778in;height:1.36111in" />

fig 1b

What is it about capsaicin and vanillin that causes these two compounds
to have such dramatically different effects on our sensory perceptions?
Both are produced by plants, and both are composed of the elements
carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and (in the case of capsaicin) nitrogen. Since
the birth of chemistry as a science, chemists have been fascinated - and
for much of that history, mystified - by the myriad properties of
compounds that come from living things. The term 'organic', from the
Greek *organikos*, was applied to these compounds, and it was thought
that they contained some kind of 'vital force' which set them apart from
'inorganic' compounds such as minerals, salts, and metals, and which
allowed them to operate by a completely different set of chemical
principles. How else but through the action of a 'vital force' could
such a small subgroup of the elements combine to form compounds with so
many different properties?

Today, as you are probably already aware, the term 'organic,' - when
applied to chemistry - refers not just to molecules from living things,
but to all compounds containing the element carbon, regardless of
origin. Beginning early in the 19th century, as chemists learned through
careful experimentation about the composition and properties of
'organic' compounds such as fatty acids, acetic acid and urea, and even
figured out how to synthesize some of them starting with exclusively
'inorganic' components, they began to realize that the 'vital force'
concept was not valid, and that the properties of both organic and
inorganic molecules could in fact be understood using the same
fundamental chemical principles.

They also began to more fully appreciate the unique features of the
element carbon which makes it so central to the chemistry of living
things, to the extent that it warrants its own subfield of chemistry.
Carbon forms four stable bonds, either to other carbon atoms or to
hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus, or a halogen. The
characteristic bonding modes of carbon allow it to serve as a skeleton,
or framework, for building large, complex molecules that incorporate
chains, branches and ring structures.

Although 'organic chemistry' no longer means exclusively the study of
compounds from living things, it is nonetheless the desire to understand
and influence the chemistry of life that drives much of the work of
organic chemists, whether the goal is to learn something fundamentally
new about the reactivity of a carbon-oxygen bond, to discover a new
laboratory method that could be used to synthesize a life-saving drug,
or to better understand the intricate chemical dance that goes on in the
active site of an enzyme or receptor protein. Although humans have been
eating hot peppers and vanilla-flavored foods for centuries, we are just
now, in the past few decades, beginning to understand how and why one
causes searing pain, and the other pure gustatory pleasure. We
understand that the precise geometric arrangement of the four elements
in capsaicin allows it to fit inside the binding pocket of the TrpV1
heat receptor - but, as of today, we do not yet have a detailed three
dimensional picture of the TrpVI protein bound to capsaicin. We also
know that the different arrangement of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen atoms
in vanillin allows it to bind to specific olfactory receptors, but
again, there is much yet to be discovered about exactly how this
happens.

In this chapter, you will be introduced to some of the most fundamental
principles of organic chemistry. With the concepts we learn about, we
can begin to understand how carbon and a very small number of other
elements in the periodic table can combine in predictable ways to
produce a virtually limitless chemical repertoire.

As you read through, you will recognize that the chapter contains a lot
of review of topics you have probably learned already in an introductory
chemistry course, but there will likely also be a few concepts that are
new to you, as well as some topics which are already familiar to you but
covered at a greater depth and with more of an emphasis on biologically
relevant organic compounds.

We will begin with a reminder of how chemists depict bonding in organic
molecules with the 'Lewis structure' drawing convention, focusing on the
concept of 'formal charge'. We will review the common bonding patterns
of the six elements necessary for all forms of life on earth - carbon,
hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and phosphorus - plus the halogens
(fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine). We'll then continue on with
some of the basic skills involved in drawing and talking about organic
molecules: understanding the 'line structure' drawing convention and
other useful ways to abbreviate and simplify structural drawings,
learning about functional groups and isomers, and looking at how to
systematically name simple organic molecules. Finally, we'll bring it
all together with a review of the structures of the most important
classes of biological molecules - lipids, carbohydrates, proteins, and
nucleic acids - which we will be referring to constantly throughout the
rest of the book.

Before you continue any further in your reading, you should do some
review of your own, because it will be assumed that you already
understand some basic chemistry concepts. It would be a very good idea
to go back to your introductory chemistry textbook or watch the
excellent video tutorials at [Khan
Academy](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/chemistry) (see links
below) to remind yourself about the following topics:

**Key topics to review from introductory chemistry**

[basics of atoms and
elements](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/chemistry/atomic-structure-and-properties/introduction-to-the-atom/v/elements-and-atoms)

[atomic
structure](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/chemistry/electronic-structure-of-atoms)

[orbitals](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/chemistry/electronic-structure-of-atoms/electron-configurations-jay-sal/v/orbitals)

[covalent and ionic
compounds](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/chemistry/atomic-structure-and-properties/introduction-to-compounds/v/introduction-to-ions)

[drawing Lewis
structures](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/organic-chemistry/gen-chem-review/dot-strcutures-jay/v/dot-structures-i-single-bonds-1)

**Atomic structure, electron configuration, and Lewis structure review
exercises**

<u>Exercise 1.1</u>: How many neutrons do the following isotopes have?

a\) <sup>31</sup>P, the most common isotope of phosphorus

b\) <sup>32</sup>P, a radioactive isotope of phosphorus used often in
the study of DNA and RNA.

c\) <sup>37</sup>Cl, one of the two common isotopes of chlorine.

d\) tritium (<sup>3</sup>H), a radioactive isotope of hydrogen, used
often by biochemists as a 'tracer' atom.

e\) <sup>14</sup>C, a radioactive isotope of carbon, also used as a
tracer in biochemistry.

<u>Exercise 1.2</u>: The electron configuration of a carbon atom is
1*s*<sup>2</sup>2*s*<sup>2</sup>2*p*<sup>2</sup>, and that of a sodium
cation (Na<sup>+</sup>) is
1*s*<sup>2</sup>2*s*<sup>2</sup>2*p*<sup>6</sup>. Show the electron
configuration for

a\) a nitrogen atom b) an oxygen atom

c\) a fluorine atom d) a magnesium atom

e\) a magnesium cation (Mg<sup>2+</sup>) f) a potassium atom

g\) a potassium ion (K<sup>+</sup>) h) a chloride anion (Cl<sup>-</sup>)

i\) a sulfur atom j) a lithium cation (Li<sup>+</sup>)

k\) a calcium cation (Ca<sup>2+</sup>)

<u>Exercise 1.3</u>: Draw Lewis structures for the following species
(use lines to denote bonds, dots for lone-pair electrons). All atoms
should have a complete valence shell of electrons. For now, do not worry
about showing accurate bond angles.

a\) ammonia, NH<sub>3</sub>

b\) ammonium ion, NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup>

c\) amide ion, NH<sub>2</sub><sup>-</sup>

d\) formaldehyde, HCOH

e\) acetate ion, CH<sub>3</sub>COO<sup>-</sup>

f\) methylamine, CH<sub>3</sub>NH<sub>2</sub>

g\) ethanol, CH<sub>3</sub>CH<sub>2</sub>OH

h\) diethylether,
CH<sub>3</sub>CH<sub>2</sub>OCH<sub>2</sub>CH<sub>3</sub>

i\) cyclohexanol (molecular formula C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>12</sub>O, with
six carbons bonded in a ring and an OH group)

j\) propene, CH<sub>2</sub>CHCH<sub>3</sub>

k\) pyruvic acid, CH<sub>3</sub>COCO<sub>2</sub>H

## Section 1.1: Drawing organic structures

### 1.1A: Formal charges

Now that you have had a chance to go back to your introductory chemistry
textbook to review some basic information about atoms, orbitals, bonds,
and molecules, let's direct our attention a little more closely to the
idea of charged species. You know that an **ion** is a molecule or atom
that has an associated positive or negative charge. Copper, for example,
can be found in both its neutral state (Cu<sup>0</sup>, which is the
metal), or in its Cu<sup>+2</sup> state, as a component of an ionic
compound like copper carbonate (CuCO<sub>3</sub>), the green substance
called 'patina' that forms on the surface of copper objects.

Organic molecules can also have positive or negative charges associated
with them. Consider the Lewis structure of methanol, CH<sub>3</sub>OH
(methanol is the so-called ‘wood alcohol’ that unscrupulous bootleggers
sometimes sold during the prohibition days in the 1920's, often causing
the people who drank it to go blind). Methanol itself is a neutral
molecule, but can lose a proton to become a molecular anion
(CH<sub>3</sub>O<sup>-</sup>), or gain a proton to become a molecular
cation (CH<sub>3</sub>OH<sub>2</sub><sup>+)</sup>.

<img src="media/image5.png" style="width:4.13889in;height:1.40764in" />

fig 1

The molecular anion and cation have overall charges of -1 and +1,
respectively. But we can be more specific than that–we can also state
for each molecular ion that a **formal charge** is located specifically
on the oxygen atom, rather than on the carbon or any of the hydrogen
atoms.

Figuring out the formal charge on different atoms of a molecule is a
straightforward process - it’s simply a matter of adding up valence
electrons.

An unbound oxygen atom has 6 valence electrons. When it is bound as part
of a methanol molecule, however, an oxygen atom is surrounded by 8
valence electrons: 4 nonbonding electrons (two 'lone pairs') and 2
electrons in each of its two covalent bonds (one to carbon, one to
hydrogen). In the formal charge convention, we say that the oxygen
'owns' all 4 nonbonding electrons. However, it only 'owns' one electron
from each of the two covalent bonds, because covalent bonds involve the
sharing of electrons between atoms. Therefore, the oxygen atom in
methanol owns 2 + 2 + (½ x 4) = 6 valence electrons.

<img src="media/image6.png" style="width:3.51875in;height:1.10208in" />

fig 2a

The formal charge on an atom is calculated as the number of valence
electrons owned by the isolated atom minus the number of valence
electrons owned by the bound atom in the molecule:

**Determining the formal charge on an atom in a molecule:**

formal charge =

(number of valence electrons owned by the isolated atom)

\- (number of valence electrons owned by the bound atom)

*or . . .*

formal charge =

(number of valence electrons owned by the isolated atom)

\- (number of non-bonding electrons on the bound atom)

\- ( ½ the number of bonding electrons on the bound atom)

Using this formula for the oxygen atom of methanol, we have:

formal charge on oxygen =

(6 valence electrons on isolated atom)

\- (4 non-bonding electrons)

\- (½ x 4 bonding electrons)

= 6 - 4 - 2 = 0

Thus, oxygen in methanol has a formal charge of zero (in other words, it
has *no formal charge*).

How about the carbon atom in methanol? An isolated carbon owns 4 valence
electrons. The bound carbon in methanol owns (½ x 8) = 4 valence
electrons:

<img src="media/image7.png" style="width:3.41667in;height:0.88889in" />

fig 2c

formal charge on carbon =

(4 valence electron on isolated atom)

\- (0 nonbonding electrons)

\- (½ x 8 bonding electrons)

= 4 - 0 - 4 = 0

. . . so the formal charge on carbon is zero.

For each of the hydrogens in methanol, we also get a formal charge of
zero:

formal charge on hydrogen =

(1 valence electron on isolated atom)

\- (0 nonbonding electrons)

\- (½ x 2 bonding electrons)

= 1 - 0 - 1 = 0

Now, let's look at the cationic form of methanol,
CH<sub>3</sub>OH<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup>. The bonding picture has not
changed for carbon or for any of the hydrogen atoms, so we will focus on
the oxygen atom.

<img src="media/image8.png" style="width:3.85208in;height:2.52778in" />

fig 2

The oxygen owns 2 non-bonding electrons and 3 bonding elections, so the
formal charge calculations becomes:

formal charge on oxygen =

(6 valence electrons in isolated atom)

\- (2 non-bonding electrons)

\- (½ x 6 bonding electrons)

= 6 - 2 - 3 = 1.

A formal charge of +1 is located on the oxygen atom.

For methoxide, the anionic form of methanol, the calculation for the
oxygen atom is:

formal charge on oxygen =

(6 valence electrons in isolated atom)

\- (6 non-bonding electrons)

\- (½ x 2 bonding electrons)

= 6 - 6 - 1 = -1

. . . so a formal charge of -1 is located on the oxygen atom.

<img src="media/image9.png" style="width:3.57431in;height:2.52778in" />

A very important rule to keep in mind is that *the sum of the formal
charges on all atoms of a molecule must equal the net charge on the
whole molecule.*

When drawing the structures of organic molecules, it is very important
to show all non-zero formal charges, being clear about where the charges
are located. *A structure that is missing non-zero formal charges is not
correctly drawn, and will probably be marked as such on an exam!*

At this point, thinking back to what you learned in general chemistry,
you are probably asking “What about dipoles? Doesn’t an oxygen atom in
an O-H bond ‘own’ more of the electron density than the hydrogen,
because of its greater electronegativity?” This is absolutely correct,
and we will be reviewing the concept of bond dipoles later on. For the
purpose of calculating formal charges, however, bond dipoles don’t
matter - we always consider the two electrons in a bond to be shared
equally, even if that is not an accurate reflection of chemical reality.
Formal charges are just that - a formality, a method of electron
book-keeping that is tied into the Lewis system for drawing the
structures of organic compounds and ions. Later, we will see how the
concept of formal charge can help us to visualize how organic molecules
react.

Finally, don't be lured into thinking that just because the net charge
on a structure is zero there are no atoms with formal charges: one atom
could have a positive formal charge and another a negative formal
charge, and the net charge would still be zero. **Zwitterions,** such as
amino acids, have both positive and negative formal charges on different
atoms:

<img src="media/image10.png" style="width:2.21319in;height:1.26875in" />

Even though the net charge on glycine is zero, it is still mandatory to
show the location of the positive and negative formal charges.

<u>Exercise 1.4</u>: Fill in all missing lone pair electrons and formal
charges in the structures below. Assume that all atoms have a complete
valence shell of electrons. Net charges are shown outside the brackets.

> <img src="media/image11.png" style="width:5.46319in;height:2.35208in" />

fig 3a

[Video tutorial on formal
charges](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/chemistry/chemical-bonds/copy-of-dot-structures/v/formal-charge-and-dot-structures)

### 1.1B: Common bonding patterns in organic structures

The electron-counting methods for drawing Lewis structures and
determining formal charges on atoms are an essential starting point for
a novice organic chemist, and work quite well when dealing with small,
simple structures. But as you can imagine, these methods become
unreasonably tedious and time-consuming when you start dealing with
larger structures. It would be unrealistic, for example, to ask you to
draw the Lewis structure below (of one of the four nucleoside building
blocks that make up DNA) and determine all formal charges by adding up,
on an atom-by-atom basis, all of the valence electrons.

<img src="media/image12.png" style="width:1.98889in;height:1.76667in" />

fig 5

And yet, as organic chemists, and especially as organic chemists dealing
with biological molecules, you will be expected soon to draw the
structures of large molecules on a regular basis. Clearly, you need to
develop the ability to quickly and efficiently draw large structures and
determine formal charges. Fortunately, this ability is not terribly hard
to come by - all it takes is learning a few shortcuts and getting some
practice at recognizing **common bonding patterns**.

Let’s start with carbon, the most important element for organic
chemists. *Carbon is **tetravalent**, meaning that it tends to form four
bonds.* If you look again carefully at the structure of the DNA
nucleoside 2'-deoxycytidine above, you should recognize that each carbon
atom has four bonds, no lone pairs, and a formal charge of zero. Some of
the carbon atoms have four single bonds, and some have one double bond
and two single bonds. These are the two most common bonding patterns for
carbon, along with a third option where carbon has one triple bond and
one single bond.

Common bonding patterns for carbon

<img src="media/image13.png" style="width:4.03333in;height:1.15556in" />

fig 6

These three bonding patterns apply to most organic molecules, but there
are exceptions. Here is a very important such exception: in carbon
dioxide, the four bonds to the carbon atom take the form of two double
bonds. (O=C=O).

Carbon is also sometimes seen with a formal charge of +1 (a
**carbocation**) or -1 (a **carbanion**). Notice that a carbocation does
not have a full octet of valence electrons.

Additional bonding patterns for carbon (high energy intermediate
species)

<img src="media/image14.png" style="width:3.46319in;height:1.61111in" />

fig 6a

Carbocations, carbanions, and carbon radicals are very high-energy
(unstable) species and thus we do not expect to see them in the
structure of a stable compound. However, they are important in organic
chemistry because they often form as transient (short-lived)
**intermediates** in reactions - they form, then very quickly change
into something else. We will have much more to say about carbocation,
carbanion, and radical intermediates in later chapters.

The bonding pattern for hydrogen atoms is easy: only one bond, no
nonbonding electrons, and no formal charge. The exceptions to this rule
are the proton, (H<sup>+</sup>, just a single proton and no electrons)
and the hydride ion, H<sup>-</sup>, which is a proton plus two
electrons. Because we are concentrating in this book on organic
chemistry as applied to living things, however, we will not be seeing
‘naked’ protons and hydrides as such: they are far too reactive to be
present in that form in aqueous solution. Nonetheless, the *idea* of a
proton will be very important when we discuss acid-base chemistry, and
the *idea* of a hydride ion will become very important much later in the
book when we discuss organic oxidation and reduction reactions.

We'll next turn to oxygen atoms. Typically, you will see an oxygen
bonding in one of three ways.

Common bonding patterns for oxygen:

<img src="media/image15.png" style="width:4.75in;height:1.66667in" />

fig 7

If oxygen has two bonds and two lone pairs, as in water, it will have a
formal charge of zero. If it has one bond and three lone pairs, as in
hydroxide ion, it will have a formal charge of -1. If it has three bonds
and one lone pair, as in hydronium ion, it will have a formal charge of
+1.

<img src="media/image16.png" style="width:2.30556in;height:0.83333in" />

fig 7a

Nitrogen has two major bonding patterns: three bonds and one lone pair,
or four bonds and a positive formal charge.

Common bonding patterns for nitrogen:

<img src="media/image17.png" style="width:4.74097in;height:1.75in" />

fig 8

Nitrogen is occasionally also seen with two bonds, two lone pairs, and a
negative formal charge - however, these species are extremely reactive
and not very relevant to biological chemistry.

Two third row elements are commonly found in biological organic
molecules: sulfur and phosphorus. Although both of these elements have
other bonding patterns that are relevant in laboratory chemistry, in a
biological context sulfur most commonly follows the same bonding/formal
charge pattern as oxygen, while phosphorus is seen in a form in which it
has five bonds (almost always to oxygen), no nonbonding electrons, and a
formal charge of zero. Remember that atoms of elements in the third row
and below in the periodic table have 'expanded valence shells' with *d*
orbitals available for bonding, and the the octet rule does not apply.

Common bonding pattern for phosphorus (phosphate)

<img src="media/image18.png" style="width:0.53333in;height:0.54444in" />

fig 9

Finally, the halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine) are very
important in laboratory and medicinal organic chemistry, but less common
in naturally occurring organic molecules. Halogens in organic chemistry
usually are seen with one bond, three lone pairs, and a formal charge of
zero, or as ions in solution with no bonds, four lone pairs, and a
negative formal charge.

Common bonding pattern for halogens:

<img src="media/image19.png" style="width:3.51875in;height:1.37986in" />

fig 10

These patterns, if learned and internalized so that you don’t even need
to think about them, will allow you to draw large organic structures,
complete with formal charges, quite quickly.

Once you have gotten the hang of drawing Lewis structures in this way,
it is not always necessary to draw lone pairs on heteroatoms, as you can
assume that the proper number of electrons are present around each atom
to match the indicated formal charge (or lack thereof). Often, though,
lone pairs are drawn, particularly on nitrogen, if doing so helps to
make an explanation clearer.

<u>Exercise 1.5</u>: Draw one structure that corresponds to each of the
following molecular formulas, using the common bonding patters covered
above. Be sure to include all lone pairs and formal charges where
applicable, and assume that all atoms have a full valence shell of
electrons. More than one correct answer is possible for each, so you
will want to check your answers with your instructor or tutor.

a\) C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>10</sub>O b) C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>O c)
C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>8</sub>NO<sup>+</sup> d)
C<sub>4</sub>H<sub>3</sub>O<sub>2</sub><sup>-</sup>

### 1.1C: Using condensed structures and line structures

If you look ahead in this and other books at the way organic compounds
are drawn, you will see that the figures are somewhat different from the
Lewis structures you are used to seeing in your general chemistry book.
In some sources, you will see **condensed structures** for smaller
molecules instead of full Lewis structures:

<img src="media/image20.png" style="width:4.90764in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 11a

More commonly, organic and biological chemists use an abbreviated
drawing convention called **line structures**. The convention is quite
simple and makes it easier to draw molecules, but line structures do
take a little bit of getting used to. Carbon atoms are depicted not by a
capital C, but by a ‘corner’ between two bonds, or a free end of a bond.
Open-chain molecules are usually drawn out in a 'zig-zig' shape.
Hydrogens attached to carbons are generally not shown: rather, like lone
pairs, they are simply implied (unless a positive formal charge is
shown, all carbons are assumed to have a full octet of valence
electrons). Hydrogens bonded to nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, or anything
other than carbon *are* shown, but are usually drawn without showing the
bond. The following examples illustrate the convention.

<img src="media/image21.png" style="width:5.05556in;height:1.72222in" />

fig 11

As you can see, the 'pared down' line structure makes it much easier to
see the basic structure of the molecule and the locations where there is
something other than C-C and C-H single bonds. For larger, more complex
biological molecules, it becomes impractical to use full Lewis
structures. Conversely, very small molecules such as ethane should be
drawn with their full Lewis or condensed structures.

Sometimes, one or more carbon atoms in a line structure will be depicted
with a capital C, if doing so makes an explanation easier to follow. *If
you label a carbon with a C, you also must draw in the hydrogens for
that carbon*.

<u>Exercise 1.6</u>: A good way to test your understanding of the line
structure convention is to determine the number of hydrogen atoms in a
molecule from its line structure. Do this for the structures below.

<img src="media/image22.png" style="width:4.67778in;height:2.76667in" />

fig 12

<u>Exercise 1.7</u>:

a\) Draw a line structure for the DNA base 2-deoxycytidine (the full
structure was shown earlier)

b\) Draw line structures for histidine (an amino acid) and pyridoxine
(Vitamin B<sub>6</sub>).

<img src="media/image23.png" style="width:3.33333in;height:2.01111in" />

fig 13

<u>Exercise 1.8</u>: Add non-zero formal charges to the structural
drawing below:

<img src="media/image24.png" style="width:2.61111in;height:1.80556in" />

<u>Exercise 1.9</u>: Find, anywhere in chapters 2-17 of this textbook,
one example of each of the common bonding patterns specified below.
Check your answers with your instructor or tutor.

a\) carbon with one double bond, two single bonds, no lone pairs, and
zero formal charge

b\) oxygen with two single bonds, two lone pairs, and zero formal charge

c\) oxygen with one double bond, two lone pairs, and zero formal charge

d\) nitrogen with one double bond, two single bonds, and a +1 formal
charge

e\) oxygen with one single bond, three lone pairs, and a negative formal
charge

### 1.1D: Constitutional isomers

Imagine that you were asked to draw a structure for a compound with the
molecular formula C<sub>4</sub>H<sub>10</sub>. This would not be
difficult - you could simply draw:

<img src="media/image25.png" style="width:2.56667in;height:0.66667in" />

fig 14

But when you compared your answer with that of a classmate, she may have
drawn this structure:

<img src="media/image26.png" style="width:2.15556in;height:0.88889in" />

fig 15

Who is correct? The answer, of course, is that both of you are. A
molecular formula only tells you *how many* atoms of each element are
present in the compound, not what the actual atom-to-atom connectivity
is. There are often many different possible structures for one molecular
formula. Compounds that have the same molecular formula but different
connectivity are called **constitutional** **isomers** (sometimes the
term ‘**structural isomer**’ is also used). The Greek term ‘*iso’* means
‘same’.

Fructose and glucose are constitutional isomers with the molecular
formula C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>12</sub>O<sub>6</sub>.

<img src="media/image27.png" style="width:3.12222in;height:1.04444in" />

fig 16

<u>Exercise 1.10:</u> Draw a constitutional isomer of ethanol,
CH<sub>3</sub>CH<sub>2</sub>OH.

<u>Exercise 1.11</u>: Draw all of the possible constitutional isomers
with the given molecular formula.

a\) C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>12</sub>

b\) C<sub>4</sub>H<sub>10</sub>O

c\) C<sub>3</sub>H<sub>9</sub>N

## Section 1.2: Functional groups and organic nomenclature

### 1.2A: Functional groups in organic compounds

**Functional groups** are structural units within organic compounds that
are defined by specific bonding arrangements between specific atoms. The
structure of capsaicin, the compound discussed in the beginning of this
chapter, incorporates several functional groups, labeled in the figure
below and explained throughout this section.

<img src="media/image28.png" style="width:3.33333in;height:1.18542in" />

fig 32

As we progress in our study of organic chemistry, it will become
extremely important to be able to quickly recognize the most common
functional groups, because *they are the key structural elements that
define how organic molecules react*. For now, we will only worry about
drawing and recognizing each functional group, as depicted by Lewis and
line structures. Much of the remainder of your study of organic
chemistry will be taken up with learning about how the different
functional groups behave in organic reactions.

The 'default' in organic chemistry (essentially, the *lack* of any
functional groups) is given the term **alkane**, characterized by single
bonds between carbon and carbon, or between carbon and hydrogen.
Methane, CH<sub>4</sub>, is the natural gas you may burn in your
furnace. Octane, C<sub>8</sub>H<sub>18</sub>, is a component of
gasoline.

Alkanes

<img src="media/image29.png" style="width:3.55556in;height:1.65556in" />

fig 17

**Alkenes** (sometimes called **olefins**) have carbon-carbon double
bonds, and **alkynes** have carbon-carbon triple bonds. Ethene, the
simplest alkene example, is a gas that serves as a cellular signal in
fruits to stimulate ripening. (If you want bananas to ripen quickly, put
them in a paper bag along with an apple - the apple emits ethene gas,
setting off the ripening process in the bananas). Ethyne, commonly
called acetylene, is used as a fuel in welding blow torches.

Alkenes and alkynes

<img src="media/image30.png" style="width:2.13889in;height:1.08333in" />

fig 18

In chapter 2, we will study the nature of the bonding on alkenes and
alkynes, and learn that that the bonding in alkenes is trigonal planar
in in alkynes is linear. Furthermore, many alkenes can take two
geometric forms: *cis* or *trans*. The *cis* and *trans* forms of a
given alkene are different molecules with different physical properties
because, as we will learn in chapter 2, there is a very high energy
barrier to rotation about a double bond. In the example below, the
difference between *cis* and *trans* alkenes is readily apparent.

<img src="media/image31.png" style="width:4.18542in;height:1.80556in" />

fig 18a

We will have more to say about the subject of *cis* and *trans* alkenes
in chapter 3, and we will learn much more about the reactivity of
alkenes in chapter 14.

Alkanes, alkenes, and alkynes are all classified as **hydrocarbons**,
because they are composed solely of carbon and hydrogen atoms. Alkanes
are said to be **saturated hydrocarbons**, because the carbons are
bonded to the maximum possible number of hydrogens–in other words, they
are *saturated* with hydrogen atoms. The double and triple-bonded
carbons in alkenes and alkynes have fewer hydrogen atoms bonded to
them–they are thus referred to as **unsaturated hydrocarbons**. As we
will see in chapter 15, hydrogen can be added to double and triple
bonds, in a type of reaction called 'hydrogenation'.

The **aromatic** group is exemplified by benzene (which used to be a
commonly used solvent on the organic lab, but which was shown to be
carcinogenic), and naphthalene, a compound with a distinctive 'mothball'
smell. Aromatic groups are planar (flat) ring structures, and are
widespread in nature. We will learn more about the structure and
reactions of aromatic groups in chapters 2 and 14.

aromatics

<img src="media/image32.png" style="width:3.75in;height:1.13889in" />

fig 19

When the carbon of an alkane is bonded to one or more halogens, the
group is referred to as an **alkyl halide** or **haloalkane**.
Chloroform is a useful solvent in the laboratory, and was one of the
earlier anesthetic drugs used in surgery. Chlorodifluoromethane was used
as a refrigerant and in aerosol sprays until the late twentieth century,
but its use was discontinued after it was found to have harmful effects
on the ozone layer. Bromoethane is a simple alkyl halide often used in
organic synthesis. Alkyl halides groups are quite rare in biomolecules.

alkyl halides

<img src="media/image33.png" style="width:3.86111in;height:1.18542in" />

fig 20

In the **alcohol** functional group, a carbon is single-bonded to an OH
group (the OH group, by itself, is referred to as a **hydroxyl**).
Except for methanol, all alcohols can be classified as primary,
secondary, or tertiary. In a **primary alcohol**, the carbon bonded to
the OH group is also bonded to only one other carbon. In a **secondary
alcohol** and **tertiary alcohol,** the carbon is bonded to two or three
other carbons, respectively. When the hydroxyl group is *directly*
attached to an aromatic ring, the resulting group is called a
**phenol**. The sulfur analog of an alcohol is called a **thiol** (from
the Greek *thio*, for sulfur).

alcohols, phenols, and thiols

<img src="media/image34.png" style="width:4.9in;height:2.22222in" />

fig 21

Note that the definition of a phenol states that the hydroxyl oxygen
must be *directly* attached to one of the carbons of the aromatic ring.
The compound below, therefore, is *not* a phenol - it is a primary
alcohol.

<img src="media/image35.png" style="width:2.15556in;height:1.65556in" />

fig 22

The distinction is important, because as we will see later, there is a
significant difference in the reactivity of alcohols and phenols.

The deprotonated forms of alcohols, phenols, and thiols are called
**alkoxides**, **phenolates**, and **thiolates**, respectively. A
protonated alcohol is an **oxonium** ion.

<img src="media/image36.png" style="width:3.2in;height:2.23333in" />

fig 23

In an **ether** functional group, a central oxygen is bonded to two
carbons. Below is the structure of diethyl ether, a common laboratory
solvent and also one of the first compounds to be used as an anesthetic
during operations. The sulfur analog of an ether is called a
**thioether** or **sulfide**.

ethers and sulfides

<img src="media/image37.png" style="width:3.04444in;height:1.6in" />

**Amines** are characterized by nitrogen atoms with single bonds to
hydrogen and carbon. Just as there are primary, secondary, and tertiary
alcohols, there are primary, secondary, and tertiary amines. Ammonia is
a special case with no carbon atoms.

One of the most important properties of amines is that they are basic,
and are readily protonated to form **ammonium** cations. In the case
where a nitrogen has four bonds to carbon (which is somewhat unusual in
biomolecules), it is called a quaternary ammonium ion.

amines

<img src="media/image38.png" style="width:4.83333in;height:1.99097in" />

fig 25

*Note*: Do not be confused by how the terms 'primary', 'secondary', and
'tertiary' are applied to alcohols and amines - the definitions are
different. In alcohols, what matters is how many other carbons the
alcohol *carbon* is bonded to, while in amines, what matters is how many
carbons the *nitrogen* is bonded to.

<img src="media/image39.png" style="width:3.47778in;height:1.44444in" />

fig 26

**Phosphate** and its derivative functional groups are ubiquitous in
biomolecules. Phosphate linked to a single organic group is called a
**phosphate ester**; when it has two links to organic groups it is
called a **phosphate diester**. A linkage between two phosphates creates
a **phosphate anhydride**.

phosphate functional groups

<img src="media/image40.png" style="width:4.75in;height:1.08333in" />

fig 27

Chapter 9 of this book is devoted to the structure and reactivity of the
phosphate group.

There are a number of functional groups that contain a carbon-oxygen
double bond, which is commonly referred to as a **carbonyl**.
**Ketones** and **aldehydes** are two closely related carbonyl-based
functional groups that react in very similar ways. In a ketone, the
carbon atom of a carbonyl is bonded to two other carbons. In an
aldehyde, the carbonyl carbon is bonded on one side to a hydrogen, and
on the other side to a carbon. The exception to this definition is
formaldehyde, in which the carbonyl carbon has bonds to two hydrogens.

A group with a carbon-nitrogen double bond is called an **imine**, or
sometimes a **Schiff base** (in this book we will use the term 'imine').
The chemistry of aldehydes, ketones, and imines will be covered in
chapter 10.

aldehydes, ketones, and imines

<img src="media/image41.png" style="width:3.4in;height:2.08889in" />

fig 28

When a carbonyl carbon is bonded on one side to a carbon (or hydrogen)
and on the other side to an oxygen, nitrogen, or sulfur, the functional
group is considered to be one of the ‘**carboxylic acid derivatives**’,
a designation that describes a set of related functional groups. The
eponymous member of this family is the **carboxylic acid** functional
group, in which the carbonyl is bonded to a hydroxyl group. The
conjugate base of a carboxylic acid is a **carboxylate**. Other
derivatives are carboxylic esters (usually just called **'esters'**),
**thioesters**, **amides**, **acyl phosphates**, **acid chlorides**, and
**acid anhydrides**. With the exception of acid chlorides and acid
anhydrides, the carboxylic acid derivatives are very common in
biological molecules and/or metabolic pathways, and their structure and
reactivity will be discussed in detail in chapter 11.

Carboxylic acid derivatives

<img src="media/image42.png" style="width:5.40764in;height:2.22222in" />

fig 29

Finally, a **nitrile** group is characterized by a carbon triple-bonded
to a nitrogen.

<img src="media/image43.png" style="width:0.83333in;height:0.49097in" />

A single compound often contains several functional groups, particularly
in biological organic chemistry. The six-carbon sugar molecules glucose
and fructose, for example, contain aldehyde and ketone groups,
respectively, and both contain five alcohol groups (a compound with
several alcohol groups is often referred to as a ‘**polyol’**).

<img src="media/image44.png" style="width:3.08889in;height:1.16667in" />

fig 31

The hormone testosterone, the amino acid phenylalanine, and the
glycolysis metabolite dihydroxyacetone phosphate all contain multiple
functional groups, as labeled below.

<img src="media/image45.png" style="width:4.60208in;height:3.57431in" />

fig 33

While not in any way a complete list, this section has covered most of
the important functional groups that we will encounter in biological
organic chemistry. Table 9 in the tables section at the back of this
book provides a summary of all of the groups listed in this section,
plus a few more that will be introduced later in the text.

<u>Exercise 1.12</u>: Identify the functional groups (other than
alkanes) in the following organic compounds. State whether alcohols and
amines are primary, secondary, or tertiary.

> <img src="media/image46.png" style="width:4.84444in;height:3.17778in" />

fig 34

<u>Exercise 1.13</u>: Draw one example each of compounds fitting the
descriptions below, using line structures. Be sure to designate the
location of all non-zero formal charges. All atoms should have complete
octets (phosphorus may exceed the octet rule). There are many possible
correct answers for these, so be sure to check your structures with your
instructor or tutor.

> a\) a compound with molecular formula C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>11</sub>NO
> that includes alkene, secondary amine, and primary alcohol functional
> groups
>
> b\) an ion with molecular formula
> C<sub>3</sub>H<sub>5</sub>O<sub>6</sub>P <sup>2-</sup> that includes
> aldehyde, secondary alcohol, and phosphate functional groups.
>
> c\) A compound with molecular formula C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>9</sub>NO
> that has an amide functional group, and does *not* have an alkene
> group.

[Video tutorial on functional
groups](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/organic-chemistry/bond-line-structures-alkanes-cycloalkanes/functional-groups/v/functional-groups-first)

### 1.2B: Naming organic compounds 

A system has been devised by the International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC, usually pronounced ***eye**-you-pack*) for naming
organic compounds. While the IUPAC system is convenient for naming
relatively small, simple organic compounds, it is not generally used in
the naming of biomolecules, which tend to be quite large and complex. It
is, however, a good idea (even for biologists) to become familiar with
the basic structure of the IUPAC system, and be able to draw simple
structures based on their IUPAC names.

Naming an organic compound usually begins with identify what is referred
to as the **'parent chain'**, which is the longest straight chain of
carbon atoms. We’ll start with the simplest straight chain alkane
structures. CH<sub>4</sub> is called **methane**, and
C<sub>2</sub>H<sub>6</sub> **ethane**. The table below continues with
the names of longer straight-chain alkanes: be sure to commit these to
memory, as they are the basis for the rest of the IUPAC nomenclature
system (and are widely used in naming biomolecules as well).

**Names for straight-chain alkanes:**

| <u>Number of carbons</u> | <u>Name</u> |
|--------------------------|-------------|
| 1                        | methane     |
| 2                        | ethane      |
| 3                        | propane     |
| 4                        | butane      |
| 5                        | pentane     |
| 6                        | hexane      |
| 7                        | heptane     |
| 8                        | octane      |
| 9                        | nonane      |
| 10                       | decane      |

Substituents branching from the main parent chain are located by a
carbon number, with *the lowest possible numbers* being used (for
example, notice in the example below that the compound on the left is
named 1-chlorobutane, *not* 4-chlorobutane). When the substituents are
small alkyl groups, the terms **methyl**, **ethyl**, and **propyl** are
used.

<img src="media/image47.png" style="width:3.79653in;height:0.99097in" />

fig 36

Other common names for hydrocarbon substituent groups **isopropyl,**
***tert*-butyl** and **phenyl**.

<img src="media/image48.png" style="width:4.35208in;height:3.27778in" />

fig 36a

Notice in the example below, an ‘ethyl group’ (in blue) is not treated
as a substituent, rather it is included as part of the parent chain, and
the methyl group is treated as a substituent. The IUPAC name for
straight-chain hydrocarbons is always based on the *longest possible
parent chain*, which in this case is four carbons, not three.

<img src="media/image49.png" style="width:2.72222in;height:1.35208in" />

fig 37

Cyclic alkanes are called cyclopropane, cyclobutane, cyclopentane,
cyclohexane, and so on.

<img src="media/image50.png" style="width:4.02778in;height:0.76875in" />

fig 38

In the case of multiple substituents, the prefixes *di*, *tri*, and
*tetra* are used.

<img src="media/image51.png" style="width:2.74097in;height:0.96319in" />

fig 39

Functional groups have characteristic suffixes. Alcohols, for example,
have ‘ol’ appended to the parent chain name, along with a number
designating the location of the hydroxyl group. Ketones are designated
by ‘one’.

<img src="media/image52.png" style="width:1.97222in;height:0.72222in" />

fig 40

Alkenes are designated with an 'ene' ending, and when necessary the
location and geometry of the double bond are indicated. Compounds with
multiple double bonds are called dienes, trienes, etc.

<img src="media/image53.png" style="width:4.88889in;height:0.79653in" />

fig 41

Some groups can only be present on a terminal carbon, and thus a
locating number is not necessary: aldehydes end in ‘al’, carboxylic
acids in ‘oic acid’, and carboxylates in ‘oate’.

<img src="media/image54.png" style="width:5.01875in;height:0.82431in" />

fig 43

Ethers and sulfides are designated by naming the two groups on either
side of the oxygen or sulfur.

<img src="media/image55.png" style="width:3.46319in;height:0.55556in" />

fig 44

If an amide has an unsubstituted –NH<sub>2</sub> group, the suffix is
simply ‘amide’. In the case of a substituted amide, the group attached
to the amide nitrogen is named first, along with the letter ‘*N*’ to
clarify where this group is located. Note that the structures below are
both based on a three-carbon (propan) parent chain.

<img src="media/image56.png" style="width:2.66667in;height:1.02778in" />

fig 45

For esters, the suffix is 'oate'. The group attached to the oxygen is
named first.

<img src="media/image57.png" style="width:3.01875in;height:0.86111in" />

fig 46

All of the examples we have seen so far have been simple in the sense
that only one functional group was present on each molecule. There are
of course many more rules in the IUPAC system, and as you can imagine,
the IUPAC naming of larger molecules with multiple functional groups,
ring structures, and substituents can get very unwieldy very quickly.
The illicit drug cocaine, for example, has the IUPAC name 'methyl
(1*R*,2*R*,3*S*,5*S*)-3-(benzoyloxy)-8-methyl-8-azabicyclo\[3.2.1\]
octane-2-carboxylate' (this name includes designations for
stereochemistry, which is a structural issue that we will not tackle
until chapter 3).

<img src="media/image58.png" style="width:2.94444in;height:2in" />

fig 47

You can see why the IUPAC system is not used very much in biological
organic chemistry - the molecules are just too big and complex. A
further complication is that, even outside of a biological context, many
simple organic molecules are known almost universally by their ‘common’,
rather than IUPAC names. The compounds acetic acid, chloroform, and
acetone are only a few examples.

<img src="media/image59.png" style="width:3.30556in;height:0.93542in" />

fig 48

In biochemistry, nonsystematic names (like 'cocaine', 'capsaicin',
'pyruvate' or 'ascorbic acid') are usually used, and when systematic
nomenclature is employed it is often specific to the class of molecule
in question: different systems have evolved, for example, for fats and
for carbohydrates. We will not focus very intensively in this text on
IUPAC nomenclature or any other nomenclature system, but if you
undertake a more advanced study in organic or biological chemistry you
may be expected to learn one or more naming systems in some detail.

<u>Exercise 1.14</u>: Give IUPAC names for acetic acid, chloroform, and
acetone.

<u>Exercise 1.15</u>: Draw line structures of the following compounds,
based on what you have learned about the IUPAC nomenclature system:

a\) methylcyclohexane

b\) 5-methyl-1-hexanol

c\) 2-methyl-2-butene

d\) 5-chloropentanal

e\) 2,2-dimethylcyclohexanone

f\) 4-penteneoic acid

g\) *N*-ethyl-*N*-cyclopentylbutanamide

### 1.2C: Abbreviated organic structures

Often when drawing organic structures, chemists find it convenient to
use the letter 'R' to designate part of a molecule outside of the region
of interest. If we just want to refer in general to a functional group
without drawing a specific molecule, for example, we can use '**R'
groups** to focus attention on the group of interest:

<img src="media/image60.png" style="width:4.26875in;height:0.91667in" />

fig 49

The R group is a convenient way to abbreviate the structures of large
biological molecules, especially when we are interested in something
that is occurring specifically at one location on the molecule. For
example, in chapter 15 when we look at biochemical oxidation-reduction
reactions involving the flavin molecule, we will abbreviate a large part
of the flavin structure which does not change at all in the reactions of
interest:

<img src="media/image61.png" style="width:5.82431in;height:2.90764in" />

fig 50

As an alternative, we can use a 'break' symbol to indicate that we are
looking at a small piece or section of a larger molecule. This is used
commonly in the context of drawing groups on large polymers such as
proteins or DNA.

<img src="media/image62.png" style="width:3.79653in;height:1.5in" />

fig 51

Finally, R groups can be used to concisely illustrate a series of
related compounds, such as the family of penicillin-based antibiotics.

<img src="media/image63.png" style="width:4.71319in;height:2.86111in" />

fig 52

Using abbreviations appropriately is a very important skill to develop
when studying organic chemistry in a biological context, because
although many biomolecules are very large and complex (and take forever
to draw!), usually we are focusing on just one small part of the
molecule where a change is taking place. As a rule, *you should never
abbreviate any atom involved in a bond-breaking or bond-forming event*
*that is being illustrated:* only abbreviate that part of the molecule
which is not involved in the reaction of interest. For example, carbon
\#2 in the reactant/product below most definitely is involved in bonding
changes, and therefore should not be included in the 'R' group.

<img src="media/image64.png" style="width:5.18542in;height:3.44444in" />

fig 52a

If you are unsure whether to draw out part of a structure or abbreviate
it, the safest thing to do is to draw it out.

<u>Exercise 1.16</u>:

a\) If you intend to draw out the chemical details of a reaction in
which the methyl ester functional group of cocaine (see earlier figure)
was converted to a carboxylate plus methanol, what would be an
appropriate abbreviation to use for the cocaine structure (assuming that
you *only* wanted to discuss the chemistry specifically occurring at the
ester group)?

b\) Below is the (somewhat complicated) reaction catalyzed by an enzyme
known as 'Rubisco', by which plants 'fix' carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide
and the oxygen of water are colored red and blue respectively to help
you see where those atoms are incorporated into the products. Propose an
appropriate abbreviation for the starting compound (ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate), using two different 'R' groups, R<sub>1</sub> and
R<sub>2</sub>.

<img src="media/image65.png" style="width:4.49097in;height:3.02778in" />

## Section 1.3: Structures of important classes of biological molecules

Because we are focusing in this textbook on biologically relevant
organic chemistry, we will frequently be alluding to important classes
of biological molecules such as lipids, carbohydrates, proteins, and
nucleic acids (DNA and RNA). Now is a good time to go through a quick
overview of what these molecules look like. These are large, complex
molecules and there is a *lot* of information here: you are not expected
to memorize these structures or even, at this point, to fully understand
everything presented in this section. For now, just read through and get
what you can out of it, and work on recognizing the fundamental things
you have just learned: common bonding patterns, formal charges,
functional groups, and so forth. Later, you can come back to this
section for review when these biomolecules are referred to in different
contexts throughout the remainder of the book.

### 1.3A: Lipids

We'll start with a large subgroup of a class of biomolecules called
**lipids**, which includes fats, oils, waxes, and isoprenoid compounds
such as cholesterol.

**Fatty acids** are composed of hydrocarbon chains terminating in a
carboxylic acid/carboxylate group (we will learn in Chapter 7 that
carboxylic acids are predominantly in their anionic, carboxylate form in
biological environments). Saturated fatty acids contain only alkane
carbons (single bonds only), mononsaturated fatty acids contain a single
double bond, and polyunsaturated fatty acids contain two or more double
bonds. The double bonds in naturally occurring fatty acids are
predominantly in the *cis* configuration.

<img src="media/image66.png" style="width:3.79653in;height:3.51875in" />

fig 53

Fatty acids are synthesized in the body by a process in which the
hydrocarbon chain is elongated two carbons at a time. Each two-carbon
unit is derived from a metabolic intermediate called **acetyl-coA**,
which is essentially an acetic acid (vinegar) molecule linked to a large
'carrier' molecule, called coenzyme A, by a thioester functional group.
We will see much more of coenzyme A when we study the chemistry of
thioesters in chapter 11.

<img src="media/image67.png" style="width:3.57431in;height:2.33333in" />

fig 54

The breakdown of fatty acids in the body also occurs two carbons at a
time, and the endpoint is again acetyl-coenzyme A. We will learn about
the details of all of the reactions in these metabolic pathways at
various places in this book. If you go on to take a biochemistry course,
you will learn more about the big picture of fatty acid metabolism - how
it is regulated, and how is fits together with other pathways of central
metabolism.

**Fats and oils** are forms of **triacylglycerol**, a molecule composed
of a glycerol backbone with three fatty acids linked by ester functional
groups.

<img src="media/image68.png" style="width:4.32431in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 55

Solid fats (predominant in animals) are triacylglycerols with long
(16-18 carbon) saturated fatty acids. Liquid oils (predominant in
plants) have unsaturated fatty acids, sometimes with shorter hydrocarbon
chains. In chapter 2 we will learn about how chain length and degree of
unsaturation influences the physical properties of fats and oils.

Cell membranes are composed of **membrane lipids**, which are
**diacylglycerols** linked to a hydrophilic **'head group'** on the
third carbon of the glycerol backbone. The fatty acid chains can be of
various lengths and degrees of saturation, and the two chains combined
make up the hydrophobic 'tail' of each membrane lipid molecule.

<img src="media/image69.png" style="width:5.40764in;height:1.75in" />

fig 56

In chapter 2 we will see how these molecules come together to form a
cell membrane.

<u>Exercise 1.17</u>: What functional group links the
phosphatidylcholine 'head' group to glycerol in the membrane lipid
structure shown above?

**Waxes** are composed of fatty acids linked to long chain alcohols
through an ester group. Tricontanyl palmitate is a major component of
beeswax, and is constituted of a 16-carbon fatty acid linked to a
30-carbon alcohol.

<img src="media/image70.png" style="width:3.61111in;height:1.71319in" />

fig 56a

**Isoprenoids**, a broad class of lipids present in all forms of life,
are based on a five-carbon, branched-chain building block called
isoprene. In humans, cholesterol and hormones such as testosterone are
examples of isoprenoid biomolecules. In plants, isoprenoids include the
deeply colored compounds such as lycopene (the red in tomatoes) and
carotenoids (the yellows and oranges in autumn leaves).

<img src="media/image71.png" style="width:5.57431in;height:4.57431in" />

fig 57

In almost all eukaryotes, isopentenyl diphosphate (the building block
molecule for all isoprenoid compounds) is synthesized from three
acetyl-Coenzyme A molecules. Bacteria and the plastid organelles in
plants have a different biosynthetic pathway to isopentenyl diphosphate,
starting with pyruvate and glyceraldehyde phosphate.

<img src="media/image72.png" style="width:5.80556in;height:4.08333in" />

### 1.3B: Biopolymer basics

Carbohydrates, proteins, and nucleic acids are the most important
**polymers** in the living world. To understand what a polymer is,
simply picture a long chain made by connecting lots of individual beads,
each of which is equipped with two hooks. In chemical terminology, each
bead is a **monomer**, the hooks are **linking groups**, and the whole
chain is a polymer.

<img src="media/image73.png" style="width:3.18542in;height:1.82431in" />

fig 59

### 1.3C: Carbohydrates

The term 'carbohydrate', which literally means 'hydrated carbons',
broadly refers to monosaccharides, disaccharides, oligosaccharides
(shorter polymers) and polysaccharides (longer polymers). We will cover
the chemistry of carbohydrates more completely in chapter 10, but the
following is a quick overview.

**Monosaccharides** (commonly called 'sugars') are four- to six-carbon
molecules with multiple alcohol groups and a single aldehyde or ketone
group. Many monosaccharides exist in aqueous solution as a rapid
equilibrium between an open chain and one or more cyclic forms. Two
forms of a six-carbon monosaccharide are shown below.

<img src="media/image74.png" style="width:3.05556in;height:1.25in" />

fig 60

**Disaccharides** are two monosaccharides linked together: for example,
sucrose, or table sugar, is a disaccharide of glucose and fructose.

<img src="media/image75.png" style="width:2.32431in;height:1.61111in" />

fig 61

**Oligosaccharides** and **polysaccharides** are longer polymers of
monosaccharides. **Cellulose** is a polysaccharide of repeating glucose
monomers. As a major component of the cell walls of plants, cellulose is
the most abundant organic molecule on the planet! A two-glucose stretch
of a cellulose polymer is shown below.

<img src="media/image76.png" style="width:2.29653in;height:1.60208in" />

fig 61a

The linking group in carbohydrates is not one that we have covered in
this chapter - in organic chemistry this group is called an acetal,
while biochemists usually use the term **glycosidic bond** when talking
about carbohydrates (again, the chemistry of these groups will be
covered in detail in chapter 10).

The possibilities for carbohydrate structures are vast, depending on
which monomers are used (there are many monosaccharides in addition to
glucose and fructose), which carbons are linked, and other geometric
factors which we will learn about later. Multiple linking (branching) is
also common, so many carbohydrates are not simply linear chains. In
addition, carbohydrate chains are often attached to proteins and/or
lipids, especially on the surface of cells. All in all, carbohydrates
are an immensely rich and diverse subfield of biological chemistry.

### 1.3D Amino acids and proteins

Proteins are polymers of amino acids, linked by amide groups known as
peptide bonds. An amino acid can be thought of as having two components:
a 'backbone', or 'main chain', composed of an ammonium group, an
'α-carbon', and a carboxylate, and a variable 'side chain' (in green
below) bonded to the α-carbon.

<img src="media/image77.png" style="width:3.64444in;height:1.67778in" />

fig 63

There are twenty different side chains in naturally occurring amino
acids (see Table 5 in the tables section at the back of this book), and
it is the identity of the side chain that determines the identity of the
amino acid: for example, if the side chain is a -CH<sub>3</sub> group,
the amino acid is alanine, and if the side chain is a -CH<sub>2</sub>OH
group, the amino acid is serine. Many amino acid side chains contain a
functional group (the side chain of serine, for example, contains a
primary alcohol), while others, like alanine, lack a functional group,
and contain only a simple alkane.

The two 'hooks' on an amino acid monomer are the amine and carboxylate
groups. Proteins (polymers of \~50 amino acids or more) and peptides
(shorter polymers) are formed when the amino group of one amino acid
monomer reacts with the carboxylate carbon of another amino acid to form
an amide linkage, which in protein terminology is a **peptide bond**.
Which amino acids are linked, and in what order - the protein
**sequence** - is what distinguishes one protein from another, and is
coded for by an organism's DNA. Protein sequences are written in the
amino terminal (N-terminal) to carboxylate terminal (C-terminal)
direction, with either three-letter or single-letter abbreviations for
the amino acids (see table 5). Below is a four amino acid peptide with
the sequence "cysteine - histidine - glutamate - methionine". Using the
single-letter code, the sequence is abbreviated CHEM.

<img src="media/image78.png" style="width:4.77778in;height:2.69444in" />

fig 64

When an amino acid is incorporated into a protein it loses a molecule of
water and what remains is called a **residue** of the original amino
acid. Thus we might refer to the 'glutamate residue' at position 3 of
the CHEM peptide above.

Once a protein polymer is constructed, it in many cases folds up very
specifically into a three-dimensional structure, which often includes
one or more 'binding pockets' in which other molecules can be bound. It
is this shape of this folded structure, and the precise arrangement of
the functional groups within the structure (especially around the
binding pocket) that determines the function of the protein.

**Enzymes** are proteins which catalyze biochemical reactions. One or
more reacting molecules–often called **substrates**–become bound in the
**active site** pocket of an enzyme, where the actual reaction takes
place. **Receptors** are proteins that bind specifically to one or more
molecules–referred to as **ligands**–to initiate a biochemical process.
For example, we saw in the introduction to this chapter that the TrpVI
receptor in mammalian tissues binds capsaicin (from hot chili peppers)
in its binding pocket and initiates a heat/pain signal which is sent to
the brain.

Shown below is an image of the glycolytic enzyme
fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (in grey), with the substrate
molecule bound inside the active site pocket.

<img src="media/image79.png" style="width:3.67569in;height:3.18542in" />

x-ray crystallographic data are from *Protein Science* **1999**, 8,
*291*; pdb code 4ALD. Image produced with JMol First Glance

### 1.3E: Nucleic Acids (DNA and RNA)

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA) are polymers
composed of monomers called **nucleotides**. An RNA nucleotide consists
of a five-carbon sugar phosphate linked to one of four **nucleic acid
bases**: guanine (G), cytosine (C), adenine (A) and uracil (U).

<img src="media/image80.png" style="width:4.32431in;height:3.82431in" />

fig 65a

<img src="media/image81.png" style="width:5.65556in;height:1.75556in" />

fig 65

In a DNA nucleototide, the sugar is missing the hydroxyl group at the 2'
position, and the thymine base (T) is used instead of uracil. (The
conventional numbering system used for DNA and RNA is shown here for
reference - the prime (') symbol is used to distinguish the sugar carbon
numbers from the base carbon numbers.)

The two 'hooks' on the RNA or DNA monomer are the 5' phosphate and the
3' hydroxyl on the sugar, which in DNA polymer synthesis are linked by a
'phosphate diester' group.

<img src="media/image82.png" style="width:2.85208in;height:2.46319in" />

fig 66

In the polymerization process, individual nucleotides are successively
added to the 3' hydroxyl group of a growing polymer: in other words, DNA
and RNA synthesis occurs in the 5' to 3' direction, and conventionally
this is the order in which sequences are written.

A DNA polynucleotide (often referred to as **single-stranded** DNA)
combines with a complementary strand to form the famous Watson-Crick
**double-helix** structure of **double-stranded DNA** (see image link at
end of chapter). RNA can also form a double helix within a variety of
single- and double-stranded structures depending on its function.
Further discussion of higher-order polysaccharide, protein, and DNA/RNA
structure is beyond the scope of this textbook, but you will learn many
more details in biochemistry and molecular biology courses. All
references to these biomolecules in this textbook will focus on organic
chemistry details at the monomer and linking group level.

## Summary of Key Concepts

*Before you move on to the next chapter, you should:*

Thoroughly review (from your General Chemistry course) the fundamental
principles of atomic structure and electron configuration, and review
the rules for drawing Lewis structures.

Be very familiar with the **common bonding patterns in organic
molecules** - you should be able to quickly recognize where lone pairs
exist, even when they are not drawn explicitly, and you should be able
to readily recognize incorrectly drawn structures -for example, when
carbon is drawn with five bonds.

Be able to determine the **formal charge** on all atoms of a compound -
with practice, you should be able to look at an organic structure and
very rapidly recognize when there is a formal charge on a carbon,
oxygen, or nitrogen.

Become adept at interpreting and drawing **line structures** for organic
molecules (line structures will be used almost exclusively for the
remainder of this textbook). A good test is to determine the molecular
formula of a molecule from a line structure.

Understand the meaning of **constitutional isomer**, and be able to
recognize and/or draw constitutional isomers of a given compound.

Be able to recognize and come up with your own examples of the most
important **functional groups** in organic chemistry, introduced in this
chapter and summarized in table 9 in the tables section at the back of
this book.

Be familiar with the basic rules of the **IUPAC nomenclature system**,
at the level presented in this textbook, and be able to draw a structure
based on its IUPAC name.

Understand how and when to use **abbreviated organic structures**
appropriately.

You need not memorize in detail the **structures of common classes of
biological molecules** illustrated in this chapter (fats, isoprenoids,
carbohydrates, proteins, and nucleic acids), but you should be able to
recognize examples when you see them. Also, you should be prepared to
refer to section 1.3 when references are made to these structures
throughout the rest of this textbook and you need a review.

As always, you should be familiar with the meaning of all of the
**terms** written in bold in this chapter.

<u>  
</u>

## Problems

**P1.1:** The figure below illustrates a section of an intermediate
compound that forms during the protein synthesis process in the cell.
Lone pairs are not shown, as is typical in drawings of organic
compounds.

a\) The structure as drawn is incomplete, because it is missing formal
charges - fill them in.

b\) How many hydrogen atoms are on this structure?

c\) Identify the two important biomolecule classes (covered in section
1.3) in the structure.

<img src="media/image83.png" style="width:3.10208in;height:1.65764in" />

**P1.2**: Find, in Table 6 ('Structures of common coenzymes', in the
tables section at the back of this book), examples of the following:

a\) a thiol b) an amide c) a secondary alcohol d) an aldehyde

e\) a methyl substituent on a ring f) a primary ammonium ion

g\) a phosphate anhydride h) a phosphate ester

**P1.3**: Draw line structures corresponding to the following compounds.
Show all lone pair electrons (and don't forget that non-zero formal
charges are part of a correctly drawn structure!)

a\) 2,2,4-trimethylpentane b) 3-phenyl-2-propenal

c\) 6-methyl-2,5-cyclohexadienone d) 3-methylbutanenitrile

e\) 2,6-dimethyldecane f) 2,2,5,5-tetramethyl-3-hexanol

g\) methyl butanoate h) *N*-ethylhexanamide

i\) 7-fluoroheptanoate j) 1-ethyl-3,3-dimethylcyclohexene

**P1.4:** Reaction A below is part of the biosynthetic pathway for the
amino acid methionine, and reaction B is part of the pentose phosphate
pathway of sugar metabolism.

<img src="media/image84.png" style="width:4.19444in;height:2.25in" />

a\) What is the functional group transformation that is taking place in
each reaction?

b\) Keeping in mind that the 'R' abbreviation is often used to denote
parts of a larger molecule which are *not* the focus of a particular
process, which of the following abbreviated structures could be
appropriate to use for aspartate semialdehyde when drawing out details
of reaction A?

<img src="media/image85.png" style="width:4.60208in;height:0.91667in" />

c\) Again using the 'R' convention, suggest an appropriate abbreviation
for the reactant in reaction B.

**P1.5**: Find, in the table of amino acid structures (Table 5),
examples of the following:

a\) a secondary alcohol b) an amide c) a thiol

d\) a sulfide e) a phenol f) a side chain primary ammonium

g\) a side chain carboxylate h) a secondary amine

**P1.6:** Draw correct Lewis structures for ozone (O<sub>3</sub>), azide
ion, (N<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>), and bicarbonate ion,
HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>. Include lone pair electrons and formal
charges, and use your General Chemistry textbook to review VSEPR theory,
which will enable you to draw correct bond geometries.

**P1.7:** Draw one example each of compounds fitting the descriptions
below, using line structures. Be sure to include all non-zero formal
charges. All atoms should fit one of the common bonding patters
discussed in this chapter. There are many possible correct answers - be
sure to check your drawings with your instructor or tutor.

a\) an 8-carbon molecule with secondary alcohol, primary amine, amide,
and *cis*-alkene groups

b\) a 12-carbon molecule with carboxylate, diphosphate, and lactone
(cyclic ester) groups.

c\) a 9-carbon molecule with cyclopentane, alkene, ether, and aldehyde
groups

**P1.8:** Three of the four structures below are missing formal charges.

<img src="media/image86.png" style="width:5.30556in;height:4.19444in" />

a\) Fill in all missing formal charges (assume all atoms have a complete
octet of valence electrons).

b\) Identify the following functional groups or structural elements
(there may be more than one of each): carboxylate, carboxylic acid,
cyclopropyl, amide, ketone, secondary ammonium ion, tertiary alcohol.

c\) Determine the number of hydrogen atoms in each compound.

**P1.9:**

a\) Draw four constitutional isomers with the molecular formula
C<sub>4</sub>H<sub>8</sub>. (

b\) Draw two open-chain (non-cyclic) constitutional isomers of
cyclohexanol (there are more than two possible answers).

**P1.10:** Draw structures of four different amides with molecular
formula C<sub>3</sub>H<sub>7</sub>NO.

