# 2: Introduction to organic structure and bonding, part II

<img src="media/image87.jpg" style="width:6in;height:3.58056in" />

(Credit: https://www.flickr.com/photos/biodivlibrary/)

 “Towards thee I roll, thou all-destroying but unconquering whale; to
 the last I grapple with thee; from hell's heart I stab at thee; for
 hate's sake I spit my last breath at thee. Sink all coffins and all
 hearses to one common pool! and since neither can be mine, let me then
 tow to pieces, while still chasing thee, though tied to thee, thou
 damned whale! THUS, I give up the spear!" The harpoon was darted; the
 stricken whale flew forward; with igniting velocity the line ran
 through the grooves;--ran foul. Ahab stooped to clear it; he did clear
 it; but the flying turn caught him round the neck, and voicelessly as
 Turkish mutes bowstring their victim, he was shot out of the boat, ere
 the crew knew he was gone. Next instant, the heavy eye-splice in the
 rope's final end flew out of the stark-empty tub, knocked down an
 oarsman, and smiting the sea, disappeared in its depths.

 (Herman Melville, *Moby Dick*)

In the classic 19<sup>th</sup> century novel 'Moby Dick', Herman
Melville's Captain Ahab obsessively hunts down the enormous albino sperm
whale which years before had taken one of his legs, the monomaniacal
quest ending with Ahab being dragged by the neck to the bottom of the
sea by his enormous white nemesis. It is fitting, somehow, that one of
the most memorable fictional characters in modern literature should be a
real-life 50 ton monster – sperm whales are such fantastic creatures
that if they didn't in fact exist, it would stretch the imagination to
make them up. They are the largest predator on the planet, diving to
depths of up to three kilometers and staying down as long as 90 minutes
to hunt the giant squid and other deep-dwelling species that make up the
bulk of their diet.

It would be hard for anyone to mistake a sperm whale for any other
creature in the ocean, due to their enormous, squared-off foreheads. It
is what is inside this distinctive physical feature, though, that
brought them to the edge of extinction in the middle of the
20<sup>th</sup> century. For over 200 years, sperm whales had been
prized by whalers for the oil that fills the 'spermaceti' and 'melon'
compartments which make up the bulk of the front part of their bodies.
Whalers in the 17<sup>th</sup> and 18<sup>th</sup> centuries would lower
one of their crew into a hole cut into a captured whale, and he would
literally ladle out the 'sperm oil ' by the bucketful, often filling
eight barrels from the head of one animal. The different processed
components obtained from raw sperm oil had properties that were ideal
for a multitude of applications: as a lubricant for everything from
sewing machines to train engines, as a fuel for lamps, and as a prized
ingredient in cosmetics and skin products.

'Sperm oil' is not really an oil – it is mostly liquid wax (refer back
to section 1.3A for a reminder of how the structure of oils differs from
that of waxes). The composition of waxes in sperm oil is complex and
variable throughout the life of the animal, but in general contains
waxes with saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbon chains ranging from 16
to 24 carbons.

Remarkably, scientists are still not sure about the function of the
enormous wax-filled reservoirs in the sperm whale's forehead. The most
prevalent hypothesis holds that they play a role in echolocation. In the
pitch-black void of the deep ocean a whale's eyes are useless, but it is
able to navigate and locate prey in the same way that a bat does, using
the reflection of sound waves. In fact, the sonic clicks generated by
the sperm whale are the loudest sounds generated by any animal on earth.
The wax reservoirs may be used somehow for the directional focusing of
these sound waves.

Another intriguing but unproven hypothesis is that the reservoir serves
as a buoyancy control device. The wax is normally liquid and buoyant at
the whale's normal body temperature, but solidifies and becomes denser
than water at lower temperatures. If the diving whale could cool the wax
by directing cold seawater around the reservoir and restricting blood
flow to the region, it could achieve negative buoyancy and thus conserve
energy that otherwise would be expended in swimming down. When it needs
to return to the surface, blood could be redirected to the wax, which
would melt and become positively buoyant again, thus conserving energy
on the upward trip.

Whatever its natural function, it is inarguable that the physical and
chemical properties of sperm oil make it valuable, both to the whale and
to humans. Fortunately for the world's population of whales, both
economic forces and conservation efforts have made virtually all trade
in sperm oil a thing of the past. Beginning in the late 19<sup>th</sup>
century, the discovery of new oil fields and advances in petroleum
processing led to the use of cheaper mineral oil alternatives for many
of the major applications of sperm oil, one of the most notable
substitutions being the use of kerosene for lamps. More recently, the
'oil' from the Jojoba plant, a native of the American southwest, has
been found to be an excellent substitute for sperm oil in cosmetics and
skin products, exhibiting many of the same desirable characteristics.
Jojoba oil, like sperm oil, is composed primarily of liquid waxes rather
than actual oils, and a major selling point of both is that the oily
substance produced by human skin, called sebum, is also composed of
about 25% wax.

While organic and biological chemistry is a very diverse field of study,
one fundamental question that interests all organic chemists is how the
structure of an organic molecule determines its physical properties. To
understand why sperm oil has properties that made it both a useful
industrial lubricant for humans and an effective buoyancy control and/or
sonic lens for a hunting sperm whale, we first have to understand the
nature of both the forces holding each wax molecule together – the
covalent single and double bonds between atoms – and also the forces
governing the noncovalent interactions between one wax molecule and all
the others around it – the so-called 'intermolecular forces' which
determine physical properties such as viscosity, melting point, and
density.

That is what we will learn about in this chapter. First, we will look
more closely at the nature of single and double covalent bonds, using
the concepts of 'hybrid orbitals' and 'resonance' to attempt to explain
how orbital overlap results in characteristic geometries and rotational
behavior for single and double bonds, as well as bonds that have
characteristics of somewhere in between single and double. Then we will
move on to a review of the noncovalent interactions between molecules -
Van der Waals, ion-ion, dipole-dipole and ion-dipole interactions, and
hydrogen bonds - and how they are manifested in the observable physical
properties of all organic substances.

Before reading any further on this chapter, you will probably need to go
back and review some topics from your Introductory Chemistry course. Be
sure that you understand the concepts of atomic orbitals, atomic
electron configuration, and that you are able to describe *s* and *p*
orbitals and orbital lobes and nodes. Now would also be a very good time
to review *VSEPR* theory.

##  2.1: Covalent bonding in organic molecules: valence bond theory

As we have been discussing how to use Lewis structures to depict the
bonding in organic compounds, we have been very vague so far in our
language about the actual nature of the chemical bonds themselves. We
know that a covalent bond involves the ‘sharing’ of a pair of electrons
between two atoms - but how does this happen, and how does it lead to
the formation of a bond holding the two atoms together?

**Valence bond theory** is most often used to describe bonding in
organic molecules. In this model, bonds are considered to form from the
overlap of two atomic orbitals on different atoms, each orbital
containing a single electron. In looking at simple inorganic molecules
such as molecular hydrogen (H<sub>2</sub>) or hydrogen fluoride (HF),
our present understanding of *s* and *p* atomic orbitals will suffice.
In order to explain the bonding in organic molecules, however, we will
need to introduce the concept of **hybrid orbitals**.

Many of the concepts in this section involve three-dimensional
visualization, and are quite challenging for many students to understand
when presented solely in a static, textbook-style format. You may find
it very helpful to refer as well to video tutorials from Khan Academy,
links to which are provided.

https://www.khanacademy.org/science/organic-chemistry/gen-chem-review/hybrid-orbitals-jay.

### 2.1A: The σ bond in the H<sub>2</sub> molecule

The simplest case to consider is the hydrogen molecule, H<sub>2</sub>.
When we say that the two hydrogen nuclei share their electrons to form a
covalent bond, what we mean in valence bond theory terms is that the two
spherical 1*s* orbitals (the grey spheres in the figure below) overlap,
and contain two electrons with opposite spin.

<img src="media/image88.jpeg" style="width:1.87986in;height:3.11111in"
alt="http://chemwiki.ucdavis.edu/@api/deki/files/38955/bacc115aa182c976fe4a6783899d6276.jpg" />

chemwiki.ucdavis.edu

/@api/deki/files/38956/ac3b11e624201e0a249d7a24ab63c67c.jpg

These two electrons are now attracted to the positive charge of *both*
of the hydrogen nuclei, with the result that they serve as a sort of
‘chemical glue’ holding the two nuclei together.

How far apart are the two nuclei? If they are too far apart, their
respective 1*s* orbitals cannot overlap, and thus no covalent bond can
form - they are still just two separate hydrogen atoms. As they move
closer and closer together, orbital overlap begins to occur, and a bond
begins to form. This lowers the potential energy of the system, as new,
*attractive* positive-negative electrostatic interactions become
possible between the nucleus of one atom and the electron of the second.

But something else is happening at the same time: as the atoms get
closer, the *repulsive* positive-positive interaction between the two
nuclei also begins to increase.

<img src="media/image89.png" style="width:4.96319in;height:2.49097in" />

fig 54

At first this repulsion is more than offset by the attraction between
nuclei and electrons, but at a certain point, as the nuclei get even
closer, the repulsive forces begin to overcome the attractive forces,
and the potential energy of the system rises quickly. When the two
nuclei are ‘too close’, we have an unstable, high-energy situation.
There is a defined optimal distance between the nuclei in which the
potential energy is at a minimum, meaning that the combined attractive
and repulsive forces add up to the greatest overall attractive force.
This optimal internuclear distance is the **bond length**. For the
H<sub>2</sub> molecule, the distance is 74 pm (picometers,
10<sup>-12</sup> meters). Likewise, the difference in potential energy
between the lowest energy state (at the optimal internuclear distance)
and the state where the two atoms are completely separated is called the
**bond dissociation energy,** or, more simply**, bond strength**. For
the hydrogen molecule, the H-H bond strength is equal to about 435
kJ/mol.

Every covalent bond in each molecule has a characteristic length and
strength. In general, the length of a typical carbon-carbon single bond
in an organic molecule is about 150 pm, while carbon-carbon double bonds
are about 130 pm, carbon-oxygen double bonds are about 120 pm, and
carbon-hydrogen bonds are in the range of 100 to 110 pm. The strength of
covalent bonds in organic molecules ranges from about 234 kJ/mol for a
carbon-iodine bond (in thyroid hormone, for example), about 410 kJ/mole
for a typical carbon-hydrogen bond, and up to over 800 kJ/mole for a
carbon-carbon triple bond. You can refer to tables in reference books
such as the CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics for extensive lists of
bond lengths and energies, and many other data for specific organic
compounds.

It is not accurate, however, to picture covalent bonds as rigid sticks
of unchanging length - rather, it is better to picture them as *springs*
which have a defined length when relaxed, but which can be compressed,
extended, and bent. This ‘springy’ picture of covalent bonds will become
very important in chapter 4, when we study the analytical technique
known as infrared (IR) spectroscopy.

One more characteristic of the covalent bond in H<sub>2</sub> is
important to consider at this point. The two overlapping 1*s* orbitals
can be visualized as two spherical balloons being pressed together. This
means that the bond has **cylindrical symmetry**: if we were to take a
cross-sectional plane of the bond at any point, it would form a circle.
This type of bond is referred to as a **σ (sigma) bond**.

<img src="media/image90.png" style="width:2.61111in;height:0.86111in" />

(chemwiki.ucdavis.edu)

/@api/deki/files/38956/ac3b11e624201e0a249d7a24ab63c67c.jpg

fig 48

A σ bond can be formed by overlap of an *s* atomic orbital with a *p*
atomic orbital. Hydrogen fluoride (HF) is an example:

<img src="media/image91.png" style="width:2.65764in;height:0.97222in" />

fig 49

A σ bond can be formed by the overlap of two *p* orbitals. The covalent
bond in molecular fluorine, F<sub>2</sub>, is a σ bond formed by the
overlap of two half-filled 2*p* orbitals, one from each fluorine atom.

<img src="media/image92.png" style="width:2.60208in;height:0.76875in" />

fig 50

### 2.1B: *sp<sup>3</sup>* hybrid orbitals and tetrahedral bonding

Now let’s look more carefully at bonding in organic molecules, starting
with methane, CH<sub>4</sub>. Recall the valence electron configuration
of a carbon atom:

<img src="media/image93.png" style="width:2.61111in;height:1.05556in" />

This picture, however, is problematic in terms of bonding. How does the
carbon form four bonds if it has only two half-filled *p* orbitals
available for bonding? A hint comes from the experimental observation
that the four C-H bonds in methane are arranged with **tetrahedral**
geometry about the central carbon, and that each bond has the same
length and strength. In order to explain this observation, valence bond
theory relies on a concept called **orbital hybridization**. In this
picture, the four valence orbitals of the carbon (one 2*s* and three
2*p* orbitals) combine mathematically (remember: orbitals are described
by wave equations) to form four equivalent **hybrid orbitals**, which
are named ***sp<sup>3</sup>* orbitals** because they are formed from
mixing one *s* and three *p* orbitals. In the new electron
configuration, each of the four valence electrons on the carbon occupies
a single *sp<sup>3</sup>* orbital.

<img src="media/image94.png" style="width:4.83333in;height:1.38889in" />

fig 58

The *sp<sup>3</sup>* hybrid orbitals, like the *p* orbitals of which
they are partially composed, are oblong in shape, and have two lobes of
opposite sign. Unlike the *p* orbitals, however, the two lobes are of
very different size. While the unhybridized *p* orbitals are oriented
perpendicular (90<sup>o</sup>) to each other, the *sp<sup>3</sup>*
hybrids are directed towards the four corners of a tetrahedron, meaning
that the angle between any two orbitals is 109.5<sup>o</sup>.

<img src="media/image95.png" style="width:2.36667in;height:1.28889in" />

View interactive 3D model: http://www.chemtube3d.com/orbitalshybrid.htm

(*select 'load sp<sup>3</sup>' and 'load H 1s' to see orbitals*)

fig 59

This geometric arrangement makes perfect sense if you consider that it
is precisely this angle that allows the four orbitals (and the electrons
in them) to be as far apart from each other as possible. This is simply
a restatement of the Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR)
theory that you learned in General Chemistry: electron pairs (in
orbitals) will arrange themselves in such a way as to remain as far
apart as possible, due to negative-negative electrostatic repulsion.

Each C-H bond in methane, then, can be described as a σ bond formed by
overlap between a half-filled 1*s* orbital in a hydrogen atom and the
larger lobe of one of the four half-filled *sp<sup>3</sup>* hybrid
orbitals in the central carbon. The length of the carbon-hydrogen bonds
in methane is 109 pm.

<img src="media/image96.png" style="width:5.40764in;height:1.85208in" />

fig 61

[another
image](http://www.kshitij-iitjee.com/Study/Chemistry/Part1/Chapter1/72.jpg)

[interactive
model](http://preparatorychemistry.com/Jmol_methane_alkane.htm)

While previously we drew a Lewis structure of methane in two dimensions
using lines to denote each covalent bond, we can now draw a more
accurate structure in three dimensions, showing the tetrahedral bonding
geometry. To do this on a two-dimensional page, though, we need to
introduce a new drawing convention: the solid / dashed wedge system. In
this convention, a solid wedge simply represents a bond that is meant to
be pictured emerging from the plane of the page. A dashed wedge
represents a bond that is meant to be pictured pointing into, or behind,
the plane of the page. Normal lines imply bonds that lie in the plane of
the page. This system takes a little bit of getting used to, but with
practice your eye will learn to immediately ‘see’ the third dimension
being depicted.

<u>Exercise 2.1</u>: Imagine that you could distinguish between the four
hydrogen atoms in a methane molecule, and labeled them H<sub>a</sub>
through H<sub>d</sub>. In the images below, the *exact same* methane
molecule is rotated and flipped in various positions. Draw the missing
hydrogen atom labels. (It will be much easier to do this if you make a
model.)

<img src="media/image97.png" style="width:3.55556in;height:1.58333in" />

 fig 61a

<u>Exercise 2.2</u>: What kind of orbitals overlap to form the C-Cl
bonds in chloroform, CHCl<sub>3</sub>?

How does this bonding picture extend to compounds containing
carbon-carbon bonds? In ethane (CH<sub>3</sub>CH<sub>3</sub>), both
carbons are *sp<sup>3</sup>*-hybridized, meaning that both have four
bonds with tetrahedral geometry. The carbon-carbon bond, with a bond
length of 154 pm, is formed by overlap of one *sp*<sup>3</sup> orbital
from each of the carbons, while the six carbon-hydrogen bonds are formed
from overlaps between the remaining *sp<sup>3</sup>* orbitals on the two
carbons and the 1*s* orbitals of hydrogen atoms. All of these are σ
bonds.

<img src="media/image98.png" style="width:3.88889in;height:1.69444in" />

fig 62

[another
image](https://qph.ec.quoracdn.net/main-qimg-7ad01c3444deeac2f83bcc8f51ed63da)

[interactive
model](http://preparatorychemistry.com/Jmol_ethane_alkane.htm)

Because they are formed from the end-on-end overlap of two orbitals, *σ
bonds are free to rotate*. This means, in the case of ethane molecule,
that the two methyl (CH<sub>3</sub>) groups can be pictured as two
wheels on an axle, each one able to rotate with respect to the other.

<img src="media/image99.png" style="width:3.63889in;height:1.18542in" />

fig 63

[video demonstration](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V2pr7e9g3E4)

In chapter 3 we will learn more about the implications of rotational
freedom in σ bonds, when we discuss the ‘conformation’ of organic
molecules.

The *sp<sup>3</sup>* bonding picture is also used to describe the
bonding in amines, including ammonia, the simplest amine. Just like the
carbon atom in methane, the central nitrogen in ammonia is
*sp<sup>3</sup>-*hybridized. With nitrogen, however, there are five
rather than four valence electrons to account for, meaning that three of
the four hybrid orbitals are half-filled and available for bonding,
while the fourth is fully occupied by a nonbonding pair (lone pair) of
electrons.

<img src="media/image100.png"
style="width:5.10208in;height:1.16667in" />

fig 64

<img src="media/image101.png"
style="width:2.96319in;height:1.38889in" />

fig 65

[another
image](http://www.mikeblaber.org/oldwine/chm1045/notes/Geometry/Hybrid/ammonia.jpg)

[interactive
model](http://www.chemtube3d.com/gallery/structurepages/nh3.html)

The bonding arrangement here is also tetrahedral: the three N-H bonds of
ammonia can be pictured as forming the base of a trigonal pyramid, with
the fourth orbital, containing the lone pair, forming the top of the
pyramid.

Recall from your study of VSEPR theory in General Chemistry that the
lone pair, with its slightly greater repulsive effect, ‘pushes’ the
three N-H σ bonds away from the top of the pyramid, meaning that the
H-N-H bond angles are slightly less than tetrahedral, at 107.3˚ rather
than 109.5˚.

VSEPR theory also predicts, accurately, that a water molecule is ‘bent’
at an angle of approximately 104.5˚. The bonding in water results from
overlap of two of the four *sp<sup>3</sup>* hybrid orbitals on oxygen
with 1*s* orbitals on the two hydrogen atoms. The two nonbonding
electron pairs on oxygen are located in the two remaining
*sp<sup>3</sup>* orbitals.

<img src="media/image102.png" style="width:5.1in;height:2.71111in" />

fig 66

<u>Exercise 2.3</u>: Draw, in the same style as the figures above,
orbital pictures for the bonding in methylamine.

[summary image of sp<sup>3</sup> bonding in CH<sub>4</sub>,
NH<sub>3</sub>, and
H<sub>2</sub>O](http://zasoby1.open.agh.edu.pl/dydaktyka/chemia/a_e_chemia/1_3_budowa_materii/img/01_04_66.jpg)

[Video
tutorial](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/organic-chemistry/gen-chem-review/hybrid-orbitals-jay/v/sp3-hybridized-orbitals-and-sigma-bonds):
sp3 hybridization

### 2.1C*: sp<sup>2</sup>* and *sp* hybrid orbitals and π bonds

The valence bond theory, along with the hybrid orbital concept, does a
very good job of describing double-bonded compounds such as ethene.
Three experimentally observable characteristics of the ethene molecule
need to be accounted for by a bonding model:

1\) Ethene is a planar (flat) molecule.

2\) Bond angles in ethene are approximately 120<sup>o</sup>, and the
carbon-carbon bond length is 134 pm, significantly shorter than the 154
pm single carbon-carbon bond in ethane.

3\) There is a significant barrier to rotation about the carbon-carbon
double bond.

<img src="media/image103.png"
style="width:1.76875in;height:1.63889in" />

fig 67

Clearly, these characteristics are not consistent with an
*sp<sup>3</sup>* hybrid bonding picture for the two carbon atoms.
Instead, the bonding in ethene is described by a model involving the
participation of a different kind of hybrid orbital. Three atomic
orbitals on each carbon – the 2*s*, 2*p*<sub>x</sub> and
2*p*<sub>y</sub> orbitals – combine to form three ***sp<sup>2</sup>*
hybrids**, leaving the 2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbital unhybridized.

<img src="media/image104.png" style="width:5.91667in;height:1.75in" />

fig 68

The three *sp<sup>2</sup>* hybrids are arranged with trigonal planar
geometry, pointing to the three corners of an equilateral triangle, with
angles of 120° between them. The unhybridized 2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbital
is *perpendicular* to this plane (in the next several figures,
*sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals and the σ bonds to which they contribute are
represented by lines and wedges; only the 2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbitals are
shown in the 'space-filling' mode).

<img src="media/image105.png"
style="width:2.05556in;height:1.40764in" />

fig 69

The carbon-carbon double bond in ethene consists of one σ bond, formed
by the overlap of two *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals, and a second bond,
called a **π (pi) bond**, which is formed by the *side-by-side* overlap
of the two unhybridized 2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbitals from each carbon.

<img src="media/image106.png"
style="width:1.41667in;height:1.13889in" />

fig 70

[another
image](https://d2gne97vdumgn3.cloudfront.net/api/file/KZ0rBmeMQPeN5SpOgwtb)

[interactive model](http://www.chemtube3d.com/orbitalsethene.htm)
(select 'show remaining p orbitals)

Unlike a σ bond, a π bond does *not* have cylindrical symmetry. If
rotation about this bond were to occur, it would involve disrupting the
side-by-side overlap between the two 2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbitals that make
up the π bond. The presence of the π bond thus ‘locks’ the six atoms of
ethene into the same plane. This argument extends to larger alkene
groups: in each case, six atoms lie in the same plane.

<img src="media/image107.png"
style="width:1.83333in;height:1.51875in" />

fig 71

<u>Exercise 2.4</u>: Redraw the structures below, indicating the six
atoms that lie in the same plane due to the carbon-carbon double bond.

<img src="media/image108.png"
style="width:2.55556in;height:0.51875in" />

fig 71a

<u>Exercise 2.5</u>: What is wrong with the way the following structure
is drawn?

<img src="media/image109.png"
style="width:1.77778in;height:0.97222in" />

 fig 71c

A similar picture can be drawn for the bonding in carbonyl groups, such
as formaldehyde. In this molecule, the carbon is
*sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized, and we will assume that the oxygen atom is
also *sp<sup>2</sup>* hybridized. The carbon has three σ bonds: two are
formed by overlap between *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals with 1*s* orbitals
from hydrogen atoms, and the third σ bond is formed by overlap between
the remaining carbon *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbital and an *sp<sup>2</sup>*
orbital on the oxygen. The two lone pairs on oxygen occupy its other two
*sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals.

<img src="media/image110.png"
style="width:4.69444in;height:1.77778in" />

fig 2

[another
image](https://classconnection.s3.amazonaws.com/270/flashcards/1032270/png/ethene1323912143714.png)

[interactive model](http://www.chemtube3d.com/orbitalsformaldehyde.htm)
(select 'show p orbital on C and O')

The π bond is formed by side-by-side overlap of the unhybridized
2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbitals on the carbon and the oxygen. Just like in
alkenes, the 2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbitals that form the π bond are
perpendicular to the plane formed by the σ bonds.

<u>Exercise 2.6</u>:

a\) Draw a figure showing the bonding picture for the imine below, and
include a verbal description of the orbital overlaps used to form the
carbon-nitrogen bond.

<img src="media/image111.png"
style="width:0.58333in;height:0.65764in" />

c\) In your drawing for part b, what kind of orbital holds the nitrogen
lone pair?

fig 72a

[Video tutorial: sp2
hybridization](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/organic-chemistry/gen-chem-review/hybrid-orbitals-jay/v/sp2-hybridization-jay-final)

Recall from section 1.2 that carbocations are transient, high-energy
species in which a carbon only has three bonds (rather than the usual
four) and a positive formal charge. We will have much more to say about
carbocations in this and later chapters. For now, though, the important
thing to understand is that a carbocation can be described as an
*sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized carbon with an ***empty** p* orbital
perpendicular to the plane of the σ bonds.

<img src="media/image112.png"
style="width:1.88889in;height:1.40764in" />

fig 72b [another
image](https://jahschem.wikispaces.com/file/view/sp2_hybrids.jpg/197514042/367x281/sp2_hybrids.jpg)

Finally, the hybrid orbital concept applies as well to triple-bonded
groups, such as alkynes and nitriles. Consider, for example, the
structure of ethyne (common name acetylene), the simplest alkyne.

<img src="media/image113.png"
style="width:1.54653in;height:0.71319in" />

Both the VSEPR theory and experimental evidence tells us that the
molecule is linear: all four atoms lie in a straight line. The
carbon-carbon triple bond is only 120 pm long, shorter than the double
bond in ethene, and is very strong, about 837 kJ/mol. In the hybrid
orbital picture of acetylene, both carbons are ***sp-*hybridized**. In
an *sp*-hybridized carbon, the 2*s* orbital combines with the
2*p*<sub>x</sub> orbital to form two *sp* hybrid orbitals that are
oriented at an angle of 180° with respect to each other (eg. along the x
axis). The 2*p*<sub>y</sub> and 2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbitals remain
unhybridized, and are oriented perpendicularly along the y and z axes,
respectively.

<img src="media/image114.png" style="width:6in;height:3.20548in" />

fig 73

The carbon-carbon σ bond, then, is formed by the overlap of one *sp*
orbital from each of the carbons, while the two carbon-hydrogen σ bonds
are formed by the overlap of the second *sp* orbital on each carbon with
a 1*s* orbital on a hydrogen. Each carbon atom still has two half-filled
2*p*<sub>y</sub> and 2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbitals, which are perpendicular
both to each other and to the line formed by the σ bonds. These two
perpendicular pairs of *p* orbitals form two π bonds between the
carbons, resulting in a triple bond overall (one σ bond plus two π
bonds).

<img src="media/image115.png"
style="width:3.74097in;height:1.01875in" />

fig 74 [another
image](http://www.kshitij-iitjee.com/Study/Chemistry/Part1/Chapter1/86.jpg)

[interactive model](http://www.chemtube3d.com/orbitalsacetylene.htm)

<u>Exercise 2.7</u>: Look at the structure of thiamine diphosphate in
Table 6. Identify the hybridization of all carbon atoms in the molecule.

[Video tutorial: sp
hybridization](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/organic-chemistry/gen-chem-review/hybrid-orbitals-jay/v/sp-hybridization-jay-final)

The hybrid orbital concept nicely explains another experimental
observation: single bonds adjacent to double and triple bonds are
progressively shorter and stronger than single bonds adjacent to other
single bonds. Consider for example, the carbon-carbon single bonds in
propane, propene, and propyne.

<img src="media/image116.png"
style="width:5.02778in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 75

All three are single, σ bonds; the bond in propyne is shortest and
strongest, while the bond in propane is longest and weakest. The
explanation is relatively straightforward. An *sp* orbital is composed
of one *s* orbital and one *p* orbital, and thus it has 50% *s*
character and 50% *p* character. *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals, by
comparison, have 33% *s* character and 67% *p* character, while
*sp<sup>3</sup>* orbitals have 25% *s* character and 75% *p* character.
Because of their spherical shape, 2*s* orbitals are smaller, and hold
electrons closer and ‘tighter’ to the nucleus, compared to 2*p*
orbitals. It follows that electrons in an *sp* orbital, with its greater
*s* character, are closer to the nucleus than electrons in an
*sp<sup>2</sup>* or *sp<sup>3</sup>* orbital. Consequently, bonds
involving *sp*-*sp<sup>3</sup>* overlap (as in propyne) are shorter and
stronger than bonds involving *sp<sup>2</sup>*-*sp<sup>3</sup>* overlap
(as in propene). Bonds involving *sp<sup>3</sup>-sp<sup>3</sup>* overlap
(as in propane) are the longest and weakest of the three.

<u>Exercise 2.8</u>:

a\) What kinds of orbitals are overlapping in bonds b-i indicated below?
Be sure to distinguish between σ and π bonds. An example is provided for
bond 'a'.

b\) In what kind of orbital is the lone pair of electrons located on the
nitrogen atom of bond a? Of bond e?

 <img src="media/image117.png" style="width:6in;height:3.2392in" />

[Video tutorial: hybrid orbital
practice](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/organic-chemistry/gen-chem-review/hybrid-orbitals-jay/v/organic-hybridization-practice)

##  2.2: Molecular orbital theory, conjugation, and aromaticity

Valence bond theory does a remarkably good job at explaining the bonding
geometry of many of the functional groups in organic compounds. There
are some areas, however, where the valence bond theory falls short. It
fails to adequately account, for example, for some interesting
properties of compounds that contain alternating double and single
bonds. To understand these properties, we need to think about chemical
bonding in a new way, using the ideas of molecular orbital (MO) theory.

### 2.2A: Another look at the H<sub>2</sub> molecule using molecular orbital theory

Let’s go back and consider again the simplest possible covalent bond:
the one in molecular hydrogen (H<sub>2</sub>). When we described the
hydrogen molecule using valence bond theory, we said that the two 1*s*
orbitals from each atom overlap, allowing the two electrons to be shared
and thus forming a covalent bond. In molecular orbital theory, we make a
further statement: we say that the two atomic 1*s* orbitals
mathematically combine to form two new orbitals. Recall that an atomic
orbital (such as the 1s orbital of a hydrogen atom) describes a region
of space around a single atom inside which electrons are likely to be
found. *A molecular orbital describes a region of space around two or
more atoms inside which electrons are likely to be found.*

Mathematical principles tell us that when orbitals combine, the number
of orbitals before the combination takes place must equal the number of
new orbitals that result from the combination – orbitals don’t just
disappear! We saw this previously when we discussed hybrid orbitals: one
*s* and three *p* orbitals make four *sp<sup>3</sup>* hybrids. When two
atomic 1*s* orbitals combine in the formation of H<sub>2</sub>, the
result is *two* **sigma (σ) molecular orbitals**.

<img src="media/image118.png"
style="width:5.79653in;height:2.40764in" />

fig 100

According to MO theory, one σ orbital is lower in energy than either of
the two isolated atomic 1*s* orbitals –this lower σ orbital is referred
to as a **bonding molecular orbital**. The second, **σ\* orbital** is
higher in energy than the two atomic 1*s* orbitals, and is referred to
as an **antibonding molecular orbital**.

The bonding σ orbital, which holds both electrons in the ground state of
the molecule, is egg-shaped, encompassing the two nuclei, and with the
highest likelihood of electrons being in the area between the two
nuclei. The high-energy, antibonding σ\* orbital can be visualized as a
pair of droplets, with areas of higher electron density near each
nucleus and a ‘node’, (area of zero electron density) midway between the
two nuclei.

Remember that we are thinking here about electron behavior as *wave
behavior*. When two separate waves combine, they can do so with
**constructive interference**, where the two amplitudes build up and
reinforce one another, or **destructive interference**, where the two
amplitudes cancel one another out. Bonding MOs are the consequence of
constructive interference between two atomic orbitals, which results in
an attractive interaction and an increase in electron density between
the nuclei. Antibonding MO’s are the consequence of destructive
interference which results in a repulsive interaction and a region of
zero electron density between the nuclei (in other words, a node).

Following the same *aufbau* ('building up') principle you learned in
General Chemistry for writing out electron configurations, we place the
two electrons in the H<sub>2</sub> molecule in the lowest energy
molecular orbital, which is the (bonding) σ orbital. The bonding
(attracting) MO is full, and the antibonding (repulsing) MO is empty.

### 2.2B: Molecular orbital theory and conjugated π bonds

The advantage of using MO theory to understand bonding in organic
molecules becomes more apparent when we think about π bonds. Let’s first
consider the π bond in ethene from an MO theory standpoint (in this
example we will be disregarding the σ bonds in the molecule, and
thinking *only* about the π bond). We start with two atomic orbitals:
one unhybridized 2p orbital from each carbon. Each contains a single
electron. In MO theory, the two atomic combine mathematically to form
two **π molecular orbitals**, one a low-energy π bonding orbital and one
a high-energy π\* antibonding orbital.

<img src="media/image119.png"
style="width:5.26875in;height:2.63889in" />

fig 101

[another
image](http://www.chem.ucalgary.ca/courses/350/Carey5th/Ch10/ethenemo.jpg)

In the bonding π orbital, the two shaded lobes of the *p* orbitals
interact *constructively* with each other, as do the two unshaded lobes
(remember, the arbitrary shading choice represents mathematical (+) and
(-) signs for the mathematical wavefunction describing the orbital).
There is increased electron density between the two carbon nuclei in the
molecular orbital - it is a bonding interaction.

In the higher-energy antibonding π\* orbital, the shaded lobe of one *p*
orbital interacts *destructively* with the unshaded lobe of the second
*p* orbital, leading to a node between the two nuclei and overall
repulsion between the carbon nuclei.

Again using the 'building up' principle, we place the two electrons in
the lower-energy, bonding π molecular orbital. The antibonding π\*
orbital remains empty.

Next, we'll consider the 1,3-butadiene molecule. From valence orbital
theory alone we might expect that the C<sub>2</sub>-C<sub>3</sub> bond
in this molecule, because it is a σ bond, would be able to rotate
freely.

<img src="media/image120.png"
style="width:1.47222in;height:1.29653in" />

fig 102

[interactive model](http://pslc.ws/modelhtms/bdpdb.htm)

Experimentally, however, it is observed that there is a significant
barrier to rotation about the C<sub>2</sub>-C<sub>3</sub> bond, and that
the entire molecule prefers to be planar. In addition, the
C<sub>2</sub>-C<sub>3</sub> bond is 148 pm long, shorter than a typical
carbon-carbon single bond (about 154 pm), though longer than a typical
double bond (about 134 pm).

Molecular orbital theory accounts for these observations with the
concept of **delocalized π bonds**. In this picture, the four *p* atomic
orbitals combine mathematically to form four π molecular orbitals of
increasing energy. Two of these - the bonding π orbitals - are lower in
energy than the *p* atomic orbitals from which they are formed, while
two - the antibonding π orbitals - are higher in energy.

<img src="media/image121.png"
style="width:5.26875in;height:4.55556in" />

fig 103

[another
image](http://www.chem.ucalgary.ca/courses/351/Carey5th/Ch10/butadienemo.jpg)

The lowest energy molecular orbital, π<sub>1</sub>, has only
constructive interaction and zero nodes. Higher in energy, but still
lower than the isolated *p* orbitals, the π<sub>2</sub> orbital has one
node but two constructive interactions - thus it is still a bonding
orbital overall. Looking at the two antibonding orbitals,
π<sub>3</sub>\* has two nodes and one constructive interaction, while
π<sub>4</sub>\* has three nodes and zero constructive interactions.

By the *aufbau* principle, the four electrons from the isolated
2*p*<sub>z</sub> atomic orbitals are placed in the bonding π<sub>1</sub>
and π<sub>2</sub> MO’s. Because π<sub>1</sub> includes constructive
interaction between C<sub>2</sub> and C<sub>3</sub>, there is a degree,
in the 1,3-butadiene molecule, of π-bonding interaction between these
two carbons, which accounts for its shorter length and the barrier to
rotation. The valence bond picture of 1,3-butadiene shows the two π
bonds as being isolated from one another, with each pair of π electrons
‘stuck’ in its own π bond. However, molecular orbital theory predicts
(accurately) that the four π electrons are to some extent delocalized,
or ‘spread out’, over the whole π system.

<img src="media/image122.png"
style="width:3.10208in;height:1.26875in" />

fig [another
image](http://wps.prenhall.com/wps/media/objects/340/348272/Instructor_Resources/Chapter_15/Text_Images/FG15_02.JPG)

1,3-butadiene is the simplest example of a system of **conjugated π
bonds**. To be considered conjugated, two or more π bonds must be
separated by only one single bond – in other words, there cannot be an
intervening *sp<sup>3</sup>*-hybridized carbon, because this would break
up the overlapping system of parallel *p* orbitals. In the compound
below, for example, the C<sub>1</sub>-C<sub>2</sub> and
C<sub>3</sub>-C<sub>4</sub> double bonds are conjugated, while the
C<sub>6</sub>-C<sub>7</sub> double bond is **isolated** from the other
two π bonds by *sp<sup>3</sup>*-hybridized C<sub>5</sub>.

<img src="media/image123.png"
style="width:1.97222in;height:1.10208in" />

fig 105

A very important concept to keep in mind is that *there is an inherent
thermodynamic stability associated with conjugation.* This stability can
be measured experimentally by comparing the **heat of hydrogenation** of
two different dienes. (Hydrogenation is a reaction type that we will
learn much more about in chapter 15: essentially, it is the process of
adding a hydrogen molecule - two protons and two electrons - to a π
bond). When the two *conjugated* double bonds of 1,3-pentadiene are
'hydrogenated' to produce pentane, about 225 kJ is released per mole of
pentane formed. Compare that to the approximately 250 kJ/mol released
when the two *isolated* double bonds in 1,4-pentadiene are hydrogenated,
also forming pentane.

<img src="media/image124.png"
style="width:3.58889in;height:2.21111in" />

fig 106

The conjugated diene is lower in energy: in other words, it is more
stable. In general, conjugated π bonds are more stable than isolated π
bonds.

Conjugated π systems can involve oxygen and nitrogen atoms as well as
carbon. In the metabolism of fat molecules, some of the key reactions
involve alkenes that are conjugated to carbonyl groups.

<img src="media/image125.png"
style="width:1.15764in;height:0.54653in" />

fig 107

In chapter 4, we will see that MO theory is very useful in explaining
why organic molecules that contain extended systems of conjugated π
bonds often have distinctive colors. β-carotene, the compound
responsible for the orange color of carrots, has an extended system of
11 conjugated π bonds.

<img src="media/image126.png"
style="width:4.79653in;height:1.21319in" />

fig 108

<u>Exercise 2.9</u>: Identify all conjugated and isolated double bonds
in the structures below. For each conjugated π system, specify the
number of overlapping *p* orbitals, and how many π electrons are shared
among them.

 <img src="media/image127.png"
 style="width:4.27778in;height:0.77778in" />

fig 6

<u>Exercise 2.10</u>: Identify all isolated and conjugated π bonds in
lycopene, the red-colored compound in tomatoes. How many π electrons are
contained in the conjugated system?

<img src="media/image128.png" style="width:6in;height:0.91037in" />

 fig 6a

### 2.2C: Aromaticity

Molecular orbital theory is especially helpful in explaining the unique
properties of **aromatic** compounds such as benzene.

<img src="media/image129.png"
style="width:0.99097in;height:1.12986in" />

fig 109

Although it is most often drawn with three double bonds and three single
bonds, in fact all of the carbon-carbon bonds in benzene are exactly the
same length (138 pm). In addition, the π bonds in benzene are
significantly less reactive than 'normal' π bonds, either isolated or
conjugated. Something about the structure of benzene makes its π bonding
arrangement especially stable. This ‘something’ has a name: it is called
‘aromaticity’.

What exactly is this ‘aromatic’ property that makes the π bonds in
benzene so stable? In large part, the answer to this question lies in
the fact that benzene is a *cyclic* molecule in which all of the ring
atoms are *sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized. This allows the π electrons to be
delocalized in molecular orbitals that extend all the way around the
ring, above and below the plane. For this to happen, of course, the ring
must be planar – otherwise the *p* orbitals couldn’t overlap properly.
Benzene is indeed known to be a flat molecule.

<img src="media/image130.png"
style="width:3.19444in;height:1.19444in" />

fig 110

[another
image](http://schoolbag.info/chemistry/central/central.files/image1197.jpg)

[interactive model](http://www.chemtube3d.com/orbitalsbenzene.htm)
(select 'show remaining *p* orbital on C')

Do all cyclic molecules with alternating single and double bonds have
this same aromatic stability? The answer, in fact, is ‘no’. The
eight-membered cyclooctatetraene ring shown below is *not* flat, and its
π bonds react like 'normal' alkenes.

<img src="media/image131.png"
style="width:1.04653in;height:0.94444in" />

fig 111

[molecular
model](http://web.chem.ucla.edu/~harding/IGOC/C/cyclooctatetraene05.JPG)

Clearly it takes something more to be aromatic, and this can best be
explained with molecular orbital theory. Let’s look at an energy diagram
of the π molecular orbitals in benzene.

<img src="media/image132.png"
style="width:5.61111in;height:3.02778in" />

fig 112

Quantum mechanical calculations tell us that the six π molecular
orbitals in benzene, formed from six atomic *p* orbitals, occupy four
separate energy levels. π <sub>1</sub> and π <sub>6</sub>\* have unique
energy levels, while the π <sub>2</sub> - π <sub>3</sub> and π
<sub>4</sub>\*- π <sub>5</sub>\* pairs are **degenerate**, meaning they
are at the same energy level. When we use the *aufbau* principle to fill
up these orbitals with the six π electrons in benzene, we see that the
bonding orbitals are completely filled, and the antibonding orbitals are
empty. This gives us a good clue to the source of the special stability
of benzene: a full set of bonding MO’s is similar in many ways to the
‘full shell’ of electrons in the atomic orbitals of the stable noble
gases helium, neon, and argon.

Now, let’s do the same thing for cyclooctatetraene, which we have
already learned is *not* aromatic.

<img src="media/image133.png"
style="width:4.94444in;height:3.79653in" />

fig 113

The result of molecular orbital calculations tells us that the lowest
and highest energy MOs (π <sub>1</sub> and π <sub>8</sub>\*) have unique
energy levels, while the other six form degenerate pairs. Notice that π
<sub>4</sub> and π <sub>5</sub> are at the same energy level as the
isolated 2*p*<sub>z</sub> atomic orbitals: these are therefore neither
bonding nor antibonding, rather they are referred to as **nonbonding
MOs**. Filling up the MOs with the eight π electrons in the molecule, we
find that the last two electrons are unpaired and fall into the two
degenerate nonbonding orbitals. Because we don't have a perfect filled
shell of bonding MOs, our molecule is not aromatic. As a consequence,
each of the double bonds in cyclooctatetraene acts more like an
*isolated* double bond.

Here, then, are the conditions that must be satisfied for a molecule or
group to be considered aromatic:

**Criteria for aromaticity:**

1)  The molecule or group must be cyclic.

2)  The ring must be planar.

3)  Each atom in the ring must be *sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized.

4)  The number of π electrons in the ring must equal 4*n*+2, where *n*
    is any positive integer including zero.

Rule \#4 is known as the **Hückel rule**, named after Erich Hückel, a
German scientist who studied aromatic compounds in the 1930’s. If *n* =
0, the Hückel number is **2**. If *n* = 1, the Hückel number is **6**
(the Hückel number for benzene). The series continues with **10, 14, 18,
22,** and so on. Cyclooctatetraene has eight π electrons, which is *not*
a Hückel number. Because six is such a common Hückel number, chemists
often use the term **'aromatic sextet'**.

Benzene rings are ubiquitous in biomolecules and drugs - below are just
a few examples.

<img src="media/image134.png"
style="width:5.27778in;height:4.88889in" />

fig 114

Recall that a benzene ring with a hydoxyl substituent -such as seen in
the tyrosine structure above - is called a phenol.

**Heterocycles** - cyclic structures in which the ring atoms may include
oxygen or nitrogen - can also be aromatic. Pyridine, for example, is an
aromatic heterocycle. In the bonding picture for pyridine, the nitrogen
is in the *imine* form: it is *sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized, with two of
the three *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals forming σ overlaps with the
*sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals of neighboring carbon atoms, and the third
nitrogen *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbital containing the lone pair. The
unhybridized *p* orbital contains a single electron, which is part of
the 6 π-electron system delocalized around the ring.

<img src="media/image135.png" style="width:4.25in;height:1.33333in" />

fig 8a

<img src="media/image136.png" style="width:6in;height:1.95062in" />

*(see links at end of chapter)fig 8b*

Pyridoxine, commonly known as vitamin B<sub>6</sub>, and nicotine are
both substituted pyridines.

<img src="media/image137.png"
style="width:3.08333in;height:1.55556in" />

fig 115

Pyrrole is a five-membered aromatic heterocycle. In pyrrole, the lone
pair electrons on the *sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized nitrogen are part of
the aromatic sextet (contrast this to pyridine, where the lone pair
occupies one of the *sp<sup>2</sup>* hybrid orbitals).

<img src="media/image138.png" style="width:6in;height:3.80279in" />

fig 116

[interactive model](http://www.chemtube3d.com/Pyrrole-Structure.htm)

Why don't we assume that the nitrogen in pyrrole is
s*p<sup>3</sup>*-hybridized, like a normal secondary amine? The answer
is simple: if it were, then pyrrole could not be aromatic, and thus it
would not have the stability associated with aromaticity. In general,
*if a molecule or group can be aromatic, it will be,* just as water will
always flow downhill if there is a downhill pathway available.

Imidazole is another important example of an aromatic heterocycle found
in biomolecules - the side chain of the amino acid histidine contains an
imidazole ring.

<img src="media/image139.png"
style="width:3.37986in;height:1.63889in" />

fig 117 [interactive
model](http://www.virtualchemistry.org/molecule.php?filename=imidazole.zmat)

In imidazole, one nitrogen is 'pyrrole-like' (the lone pair contributes
to the aromatic sextet) and one is 'pyridine-like' (an imine - the lone
pair is located in an *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbital, and is *not* part of the
aromatic sextet).

**Fused-ring** structures can also fulfill the Hückel criteria, and
often have many of the same properties as monocyclic aromatic compounds,
including a planar structure. Indole (a functional group on the side
chain of the amino acid tryptophan) and purine (similar in structure to
the guanine and adenine bases in DNA and RNA) both have a total of ten π
electrons delocalized around two rings.

<img src="media/image140.png"
style="width:2.40764in;height:1.10208in" />

fig 118

The nucleic acid bases of DNA and RNA - guanine, adenine, cytosine,
thymine, and uracil - are all aromatic systems, with the characteristic
aromatic properties of planarity and delocalized π electron density.
When you study the structure and function of DNA and RNA in a
biochemistry or molecular biology course, you will see that the planar
shape of the bases plays a critically important role.

<img src="media/image141.png"
style="width:5.04653in;height:3.44444in" />

fig 119

interactive models:

[adenine](http://www.chem.purdue.edu/jmol/molecules/aden.html),
[guanine](http://www.chem.purdue.edu/jmol/molecules/guan.html),
[uracil](http://www.chem.purdue.edu/jmol/molecules/uracil.html),
[thymine](http://www.chem.purdue.edu/jmol/molecules/thymine.html),
[cytosine](http://www.chem.purdue.edu/jmol/molecules/cyto.html)

<u>Exercise 2.11</u>: Classify the nitrogen atoms of indole and purine
in terms of where the lone pair electrons are located.

<u>Exercise 2.12:</u> Are the following molecules/ions aromatic?
Explain, using criteria you learned in this section.

<img src="media/image142.png"
style="width:3.05556in;height:1.62222in" />

##  2.3: Resonance

### 2.3A: What is resonance?

If we were to draw the structure of 1,2-dimethylbenzene, there are two
ways that we could draw the double bonds:

<img src="media/image143.png"
style="width:3.88889in;height:0.93542in" />

fig 6

Which way is correct? There are two simple answers to this question:
'both' and 'neither one'. Both ways of drawing the molecule are equally
acceptable approximations of the bonding picture for the molecule, but
neither one, by itself, is an accurate picture of the delocalized π
bonds. The two alternative drawings, however, *when considered
together*, give a much more accurate picture than either one on its own.
The two drawings imply, when considered together, that the carbon-carbon
bonds are not double bonds, not single bonds, but halfway in between.

These two drawings are an example of what is referred to in organic
chemistry as **resonance contributors**: two or more different Lewis
structures depicting the same molecule or ion that, when considered
together, do a better job of approximating delocalized π bonding than
any single structure. By convention, resonance contributors are linked
by a double-headed arrow:

<img src="media/image144.png"
style="width:3.40764in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 9

In order to make it easier to visualize the difference between two
resonance contributors, small **curved arrows** are often used. Each of
these arrows (colored red for emphasis in the figure above) depicts the
‘movement’ of two π electrons. A few chapters from now when we begin to
study organic reactions - a process in which electron density shifts and
covalent bonds between atoms break and form - this ‘curved arrow
notation’ will become extremely important in depicting electron
movement. In the drawing of resonance contributors, however, this
electron ‘movement’ occurs only in our minds, as we try to visualize
delocalized π bonds. Nevertheless, use of the curved arrow notation is
an essential skill that you will need to develop in drawing resonance
contributors.

The depiction of benzene using the two resonance contributors A and B in
the figure above does *not* imply that the molecule at one moment looks
like structure A, then at the next moment shifts to look like structure
B. Rather, at all moments, the molecule is a combination, or
**resonance** **hybrid** of both A and B.

**Caution**! It is very important to be clear that in drawing two (or
more) resonance contributors, we are not drawing two different
molecules: they are simply *different depictions of the exact same
molecule*. Furthermore, the double-headed resonance arrow does NOT mean
that a chemical reaction has taken place.

Usually, derivatives of benzene (and phenyl groups, when the benzene
ring is incorporated into a larger organic structure) are depicted with
only one resonance contributor, and it is assumed that the reader
understands that resonance hybridization is implied. This is the
convention that will be used for the most part in this book. In other
books or articles, you may sometimes see benzene or a phenyl group drawn
with a circle inside the hexagon, either solid or dashed, as a way of
drawing a resonance hybrid.

<img src="media/image145.png"
style="width:3.80556in;height:0.80556in" />

6

fig 10

### 2.3B: Resonance contributors for the carboxylate group

The convention of drawing two or more resonance contributors to
approximate a single structure may seem a bit clumsy to you at this
point, but as you gain experience you will see that the practice is
actually very useful when discussing the manner in which many functional
groups react. Let’s next consider the carboxylate ion (the conjugate
base of a carboxylic acid). As our example, we will use formate, the
simplest possible carboxylate-containing molecule. The conjugate acid of
formate is formic acid, which causes the painful sting you felt if you
have ever been bitten by an ant.

<img src="media/image146.png"
style="width:2.12986in;height:0.83333in" />

fig 11

Usually, you will see carboxylate groups drawn with one carbon-oxygen
double bond and one carbon-oxygen single bond, with a negative formal
charge located on the single-bonded oxygen. In actuality, however, the
two carbon-oxygen bonds are the same length, and although there is
indeed an overall negative formal charge on the group, it is shared
equally (delocalized) between the two oxygens. Therefore, the
carboxylate can be more accurately depicted by a *pair* of resonance
contributors. Alternatively, a single structure can be used, with a
dashed line depicting the resonance-delocalized π bond and the negative
charge located in between the two oxygens.

<img src="media/image147.png"
style="width:2.15764in;height:2.13889in" />

fig 12

Let’s see if we can correlate these drawing conventions to valence bond
theory. The carbon is *sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized: the bond angles are
close to 120˚, and the molecule is planar. Both carbon-oxygen σ bonds,
then, are formed from the overlap of carbon *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals
and oxygen *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals.

<img src="media/image148.png"
style="width:3.85208in;height:2.04653in" />

fig 13

In addition, the carbon and both oxygens each have an unhybridized
2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbital situated perpendicular to the plane of the σ
bonds. These three 2*p*<sub>z</sub> orbitals are parallel to each other,
and can overlap in a side-by-side fashion to form a delocalized π bond.

<img src="media/image149.png"
style="width:4.90764in;height:2.60208in" />

fig 14

Resonance contributor A shows oxygen \#1 sharing a pair of electrons
with carbon in a π bond, and oxygen \#2 holding a lone pair of electrons
in its *p* orbital. Resonance contributor B, on the other hand, shows
oxygen \#2 participating in the π bond with carbon, and oxygen \#1
holding a lone pair in its *p* orbital. Overall, the situation is one of
***three** parallel, overlapping p orbitals sharing **four** delocalized
π electrons*. Because there is one more electron than there are *p*
orbitals, the system has an overall charge of –1. This is the kind of 3D
picture that resonance contributors are used to approximate, and once
you get some practice you should be able to quickly visualize
overlapping *p* orbitals and delocalized π electrons whenever you see
resonance structures being used. In this text, carboxylate groups will
usually be drawn showing only one resonance contributor for the sake of
simplicity, but you should always keep in mind that the two C-O bonds
are equal, and that the negative charge is delocalized to both oxygens.

<u>Exercise 2.13</u>: There is a third resonance contributor for formate
(which we will soon learn is considered a 'minor' contributor). Draw
this resonance contributor.

Here's another example, this time with a carbocation. Recall from
section 2.1C that carbocations are *sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized, with an
empty *p* orbital oriented perpendicular to the plane formed by three σ
bonds. If a carbocation is adjacent to a double bond, then three *p*
orbitals can overlap and share the two π electrons - another kind of
conjugated π system in which the positive charge is shared over two
carbons.

<img src="media/image150.png"
style="width:3.57431in;height:2.76875in" />

fig 14a

<u>Exercise 2.14</u>: Draw the resonance contributors that correspond to
the curved, two-electron movement arrows in the resonance expressions
below.

<img src="media/image151.png"
style="width:3.88889in;height:1.71319in" />

fig 14b

<u>Exercise 2.15</u>: In each resonance expression, draw curved
two-electron movement arrows on the left-side contributor that shows how
we get to the right-side contributor. Be sure to include formal charges.

<img src="media/image152.png"
style="width:5.05556in;height:2.49097in" />

fig 14c

### 2.3C: Rules for drawing resonance structures

As you work on learning how to draw and interpret resonance structures,
there are a few basic rules that you should keep in mind in order to
avoid drawing nonsensical structures. All of these rules make perfect
sense as long as you keep in mind that resonance contributors are merely
a human-invented convention for depicting the delocalization of π
electrons in conjugated systems.

 **Rules for drawing resonance structures:**

 1\) When you see two different resonance contributors, you are *not*
 seeing a chemical reaction! Rather, you are seeing the exact same
 molecule or ion depicted in two different ways.

 2\) Resonance contributors involve the ‘imaginary movement’ of
 π-bonded electrons or of lone-pair electrons that are adjacent to
 (*i.e*. conjugated to) π bonds. You can *never* shift the location of
 electrons in σ bonds – if you show a σ bond forming or breaking, you
 are showing a chemical reaction taking place (see rule \#1). Likewise,
 the positions of *atoms* in the molecule cannot change between two
 resonance contributors.

 3\) All resonance contributors for a molecule or ion must have the
 same *net* charge.

 4\) All resonance contributors must be drawn as proper Lewis
 structures, with correct formal charges. Never show curved 'electron
 movement' arrows that would lead to a situation where a second-row
 element (ie. carbon, nitrogen, or oxygen) has more than eight
 electrons: this would break the 'octet rule'. Sometimes, however, we
 will draw resonance contributors in which a carbon atom has only six
 electrons (ie. a carbocation). In general, all oxygen and nitrogen
 atoms should have a complete octet of valence electrons.

To expand a bit on rule \#4, there are really only three things we can
do with curved arrows when drawing resonance structures. First, we can
take the two electrons in a π bond and shift them to become a lone pair
on an adjacent atom (arrow ‘a’ below).

Second, we can take a lone pair on an atom and put those two electrons
into a π bond on the same atom (arrow ‘b’). Third, we can shift a π bond
one position over (arrow c).

<img src="media/image153.png"
style="width:2.93542in;height:2.55556in" />

fig 15

Resonance arrows can also be combined - below, we show arrows a and b
together:

<img src="media/image154.png"
style="width:2.37986in;height:0.69444in" />

fig 15a

Notice that we do not exceed the octet rule on any atoms when we move
electrons with arrows a, b and c. The resonance picture below shows an
'illegal' movement of electrons, because it would result in a carbon
with five bonds, or 10 valence electrons (this would break the octet
rule):

<img src="media/image155.png"
style="width:3.32431in;height:1.30556in" />

fig 15b

Always be very careful when drawing resonance structures that your
arrows do ***only*** the three types of electron movement described
above, and that you ***never*** exceed the octet rule on a second-row
element. It is often helpful (but optional), to include all lone-pair
electrons on oxygen and nitrogen in the drawing in order to keep track
of valence electrons, avoid breaking the octet rule, and recognize when
atoms have a negative or positive formal charge. Getting the 'electron
accounting' correct is a big part of working with resonance
contributors.

Below are a few more examples of 'legal' resonance expressions. Confirm
for yourself that the octet rule is not exceeded for any atoms, and that
formal charges are correct.

<img src="media/image156.png" style="width:6in;height:2.10453in" />

fig 15c

<u>Exercise 2.16</u>: Each of the 'illegal' resonance expressions below
contains one or more mistakes. Explain what is incorrect in each.

<img src="media/image157.png"
style="width:5.88889in;height:4.05556in" />

fig 16a

### 2.3D: Major vs minor resonance contributors

Different resonance contributors do not always make the same
contribution to the overall structure of the hybrid - rather, in many
cases one contributor comes closer to depicting the actual bonding
picture than another. In the case of carboxylates, contributors A and B
below are equivalent in terms of their relative contribution to the
hybrid structure. However, there is also a third resonance contributor
‘C, in which the carbon bears a positive formal charge and both oxygens
are single-bonded and bear negative charges.

<img src="media/image158.png"
style="width:4.51875in;height:1.07431in" />

fig 17

Structure C makes a less important contribution to the overall bonding
picture of the group relative to A and B. How do we know that structure
C is the ‘minor’ contributor? There are four basic rules which you need
to learn in order to evaluate the relative importance of different
resonance contributors. We will number them 5-8 so that they may be
added to in the 'rules for resonance' list from section 2.2C.

 **Rules for determining major and minor resonance contributors:**

 5\) The carbon in contributor C does not have an octet – in general,
 resonance contributors in which a carbon does not fulfill the octet
 rule are relatively less important.

 6\) In structure C, a separation of charge has been introduced that is
 not present in A or B. In general, resonance contributors in which
 there is a greater separation of charge are relatively less important.

 7\) In structure C, there are only three bonds, compared to four in A
 and B. In general, a resonance structure with a lower number of total
 bonds is relatively less important.

 8\) The resonance contributor in which a negative formal charge is
 located on a more electronegative atom, usually oxygen or nitrogen, is
 more stable than one in which the negative charge is located on a less
 electronegative atom such as carbon. *An example is in the upper left
 expression in the next figure.*

Below are some additional examples of major and minor resonance
contributors:

<img src="media/image159.png" style="width:6in;height:2.60298in" />

fig 17a

Why do we worry about a resonance contributor if it is the minor one? We
will see later that very often a minor contributor can still be
extremely important to our understanding of how a molecule reacts.

<u>Exercise 2.17:</u> a) Draw a minor resonance structure for acetone
(IUPAC name 2-propanone). Explain why it is a minor contributor. b) Are
acetone and 2-propanol resonance contributors of each other? Explain.

<u>Exercise 2.18</u>:

a\) Draw four additional resonance contributors for the molecule below.
Label each one as major or minor (the structure below is of a major
contributor).

<img src="media/image160.png"
style="width:1.86667in;height:0.75556in" />

b\) Draw four resonance contributors showing how the positive charge on
the side chain of the (cationic) amino acid arginine can be delocalized.

<u>Exercise 2.19</u>: Draw three resonance contributors of methyl
acetate (IUPAC name methyl methanoate), and order them according to
their relative importance to the bonding picture of the molecule.
Explain your reasoning.

[Video tutorial:
resonance](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/organic-chemistry/organic-structures/formal-charge-resonance/v/resonance-intro-jay)

### 2.3E: Resonance and peptide bonds

What is the hybridization state of the nitrogen atom in an amide? At
first glance, it would seem logical to say that it is
*sp<sup>3</sup>*-hybridized, because, like the nitrogen in an amine, the
Lewis structure shows three single bonds and a lone pair. The picture
looks quite different, though, if we consider another resonance
contributor in which the nitrogen has a double bond to the carbonyl
carbon: in this case, we would have to say that applicable hybridization
is *sp<sup>2</sup>*, and the bonding geometry trigonal planar rather
than tetrahedral.

<img src="media/image161.png"
style="width:5.16667in;height:1.65764in" />

fig 18a

In fact, the latter picture is more accurate: the lone pair of electrons
on an amide nitrogen are not localized in an *sp<sup>3</sup>* orbital,
rather, they are delocalized as part of a conjugated π system, and the
bonding geometry around the nitrogen is trigonal planar as expected for
*sp<sup>2</sup>* hybridization. This is a good illustration of an
important point: conjugation and the corresponding delocalization of
electron density is stabilizing, thus if conjugation can occur, it
probably will.

One of the most important examples of amide groups in nature is the
‘peptide bond’ that links amino acids to form polypeptides and proteins.

<img src="media/image162.png"
style="width:2.29653in;height:1.29653in" />

fig 18

Critical to the structure of proteins is the fact that, although it is
conventionally drawn as a single bond, *the C-N bond in a peptide
linkage has a significant barrier to rotation*, indicating that to some
degree, C-N π overlap is present - in other words, there is some double
bond character, and the nitrogen is *sp<sup>2</sup>* hybridized with
trigonal planar geometry.

<img src="media/image163.png"
style="width:2.47222in;height:0.88889in" />

fig 18

The barrier to rotation in peptide bonds is an integral part of protein
structure, introducing more rigidity to the protein's backbone. If there
were no barrier to rotation in a peptide bond, proteins would be much
more 'floppy' and three dimensional folding would be very different.

[Interactive model of a Leu-Ala
peptide](http://www.biotopics.co.uk/jsmol/leuala.html):

note the trigonal planar geometry of the peptide bond nitrogen!

<u>Exercise 2.20</u>: Draw two pictures showing the unhybridized *p*
orbitals and the location of π electrons in methyl amide. One picture
should represent the major resonance contributor, the other the minor
contributor. How many overlapping *p* orbitals are sharing how many
π-bonded electrons?

<u>Exercise 2.21:</u> Draw two pictures showing the unhybridized *p*
orbitals and the location of π electrons in the 'enolate' anion shown
below. One picture should represent the major resonance contributor, the
other the minor contributor. How many overlapping *p* orbitals are
sharing how many π-bonded electrons?

<img src="media/image164.png"
style="width:2.46319in;height:0.82431in" />

fig 20

<u>Exercise 2.22</u>: Below is a minor resonance contributor of a
species known as an 'enamine', which we will study more in chapter 12.
Draw the major resonance contributor for the enamine, and explain why
your contributor is the major one (refer to resonance rules \#5-8 from
this section).

<img src="media/image165.png"
style="width:0.90764in;height:0.72222in" />

fig 21

<u>Solved example:</u>

Draw the major resonance contributor of the structure below. Include in
your figure the appropriate curved arrows showing how you got from the
given structure to your structure. Explain why your contributor is the
major one. In what kind of orbitals are the two lone pairs on the
oxygen?

<img src="media/image166.png"
style="width:2.07431in;height:0.44444in" />

fig 23a

<u>Solution</u>: In the structure above, the carbon with the positive
formal charge does not have a complete octet of valence electrons. Using
the curved arrow convention, a lone pair on the oxygen can be moved to
the adjacent bond to the left, and the electrons in the double bond
shifted over to the left (see the rules for drawing resonance
contributors to convince yourself that these are 'legal' moves).

<img src="media/image167.png"
style="width:4.21319in;height:1.24097in" />

fig 23a

The resulting resonance contributor, in which the oxygen bears the
formal charge, is the major one because all atoms have a complete octet,
and there is one additional bond drawn (resonance rules \#5 and \#7 both
apply). This system can be thought of as four parallel *p* orbitals (one
each on C<sub>2</sub>, C<sub>3</sub>, and C<sub>4</sub>, plus one on
oxygen) sharing four π electrons. One lone pair on the oxygen is in an
unhybridized *p* orbital and is part of the conjugated π system, and the
other is located in an *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbital.

Also note that one additional contributor can be drawn, but it is also
minor because it has a carbon with an incomplete octet:

<img src="media/image168.png"
style="width:1.10208in;height:0.62986in" />

fig 23a

<u>Exercise 2.23</u>:

a\) Draw three additional resonance contributors for the carbocation
below. Include in your figure the appropriate curved arrows showing how
one contributor is converted to the next.

<img src="media/image169.png" style="width:1.5in;height:0.41667in" />

fig 23

b\) Fill in the blanks: the conjugated π system in this carbocation is
composed of \_\_\_\_\_\_ *p* orbitals sharing \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
delocalized π electrons.

<u>Exercise 2.24</u>:

Draw the major resonance contributor for each of the anions below.

<img src="media/image170.png"
style="width:2.30556in;height:2.13889in" />

fig 24

c\) Fill in the blanks: the conjugated π system in part (a) is composed
of \_\_\_\_\_\_ *p* orbitals containing \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ delocalized π
electrons.

<u>Exercise 2.25</u>: The figure below shows how the negative formal
charge on the oxygen can be delocalized to the carbon indicated by an
arrow. More resonance contributors can be drawn in which negative charge
is delocalized to three other atoms on the molecule.

a\) Circle these atoms.

b\) Draw the two most important resonance contributors for the molecule.

<img src="media/image171.png"
style="width:4.47222in;height:1.07431in" />

fig 24a

**A word of advice**

Becoming adept at drawing resonance contributors, using the curved arrow
notation to show how one contributor can be converted to another, and
understanding the concepts of conjugation and resonance delocalization
are some of the most challenging but also most important jobs that you
will have as a beginning student of organic chemistry. If you work hard
now to gain a firm grasp of these ideas, you will have come a long way
toward understanding much of what follows in your organic chemistry
course. Conversely, if you fail to come to grips with these concepts
now, a lot of what you see later in the course will seem like a bunch of
mysterious and incomprehensible lines, dots, and arrows, and you will be
in for a rough ride, to say the least. More so than many other topics in
organic chemistry, *understanding bonding, conjugation, and resonance is
something that most students really need to work on 'in person' with an
instructor or tutor*, *preferably* *using a molecular modeling kit*.
Keep working problems, keep asking questions, and keep at it until it
all makes sense!

##  2.4: Non-covalent interactions

Until now we have been focusing on understanding the covalent bonds that
hold individual molecules together. We turn next to a review on the
subject of non-covalent interactions *between* molecules, or between
different functional groups within a single molecule. You have probably
learned all of these concepts already in your general chemistry course,
but this review will focus on applications to organic and biological
chemistry, and specifically will allow us to explain differences in
physical properties -such boiling points, melting points, and
solubility - between different organic compounds. An understanding of
noncovalent interactions is also critical for looking at the environment
inside the active site of an enzyme, where much of the chemistry that we
will study in this book takes place.

### 2.4A: Dipoles

To understand the nature of noncovalent interactions, we first must
return to covalent bonds and delve into the subject of dipoles. Many of
the covalent bonds that we have seen – between two carbons, for example,
or between a carbon and a hydrogen –involve the approximately equal
sharing of electrons between the two atoms in the bond. In these
examples, the two atoms have approximately the same
**electronegativity**. Recall from your general chemistry course that
electronegativity refers to “ the power of an atom in a molecule to
attract electrons to itself” (this is the definition offered by Linus
Pauling, the eminent 20<sup>th</sup>-century American chemist who was
primarily responsible for developing many of the bonding concepts that
we have been learning).

However, quite often in organic chemistry we deal with covalent bonds
between two atoms with different electronegativities, and in these cases
the sharing of electrons is not equal: the more electronegative nucleus
pulls the two electrons closer. In the carbon-oxygen bond of an alcohol,
for example, the two electrons in the σ bond are held more closely to
the oxygen than they are to the carbon, because oxygen is significantly
more electronegative than carbon. The same is true for the
oxygen-hydrogen bond, as hydrogen is slightly less electronegative than
carbon, and much less electronegative than oxygen.

<img src="media/image172.png"
style="width:2.74097in;height:1.47222in" />

fig 25

The result of this unequal sharing is what we call a **bond dipole**,
which exists in a **polar covalent bond**. A bond dipole has both
negative and positive ends, or poles, where electron density is lower
(the positive pole) and higher (the negative pole). The difference in
electron density can be expressed using the Greek letter δ (delta) to
denote ‘partial positive’ and ‘partial negative’ charge on the atoms.
‘Dipole arrows’, with a positive sign on the tail, are also used to
indicated the negative (higher electron density) direction of the
dipole.

The degree of polarity in a covalent bond depends on the difference in
electronegativity between the two atoms. Electronegativity is a periodic
trend: it increases going from left to right across a row of the
periodic table of the elements, and also increases as we move up a
column. Therefore, oxygen is more electronegative than nitrogen, which
is in turn more electronegative than carbon. Oxygen is also more
electronegative than sulfur. Fluorine, in the top right corner of the
periodic table, is the most electronegative of the elements. Hydrogen is
slightly less electronegative than carbon.

**Periodic trends in electronegativity**

<img src="media/image173.png"
style="width:2.29653in;height:1.44444in" />

fig 25a

<u>Exercise 2.26</u>: Using what you about atomic orbitals, rationalize
the periodic trends in electronegativity. Why does it increase from left
to right, and decrease from top to bottom? This is a good question to
talk through with classmates and an instructor or tutor.

Most molecules contain both polar and nonpolar covalent bonds. Depending
on the location of polar bonds and bonding geometry, molecules may
possess a net polarity, called a **molecular dipole moment**. Water, as
you probably recall, has a dipole moment that results from the combined
dipoles of its two oxygen-hydrogen bonds. Fluoromethane also has a
dipole moment.

<img src="media/image174.png" style="width:4.75in;height:1.5in" />

fig 26a

Tetrafluoromethane, however, has four polar bonds that pull equally in
to the four corners of a tetahedron, meaning that although there are
four bond dipoles there is no overall *molecular* dipole moment. Carbon
dioxide also lacks a molecular dipole moment.

<u>Exercise 2.27</u>: Which of the molecules below have molecular dipole
moments?

<img src="media/image175.png" style="width:6in;height:0.87581in" />

### 2.4B: Ion-ion, dipole-dipole and ion-dipole interactions

The strongest type of non-covalent interaction is between two ionic
groups of opposite charge (an **ion-ion** or **charge-charge
interaction**). You probably saw lots of examples of ionic bonds in
inorganic compounds in your general chemistry course: for example, table
salt is composed of sodium cations and chloride anions, held in a
crystal lattice by ion-ion interactions. One of the most common examples
in biological organic chemistry is the interaction between a magnesium
cation (Mg<sup>+2</sup>) and an anionic carboxylate or phosphate group.
The figure below shows 2-phosphoglycerate, an intermediate in the
glycolysis pathway, interacting with two Mg<sup>+2</sup> ions in the
active site of a glycolytic enzyme called enolase.

<img src="media/image176.png"
style="width:3.12986in;height:1.54653in" />

fig 27

Polar molecules – those with an overall dipole moment, such as acetone –
can align themselves in such a way as to allow their respective positive
and negative poles to interact with each other. This is called a
**dipole-dipole interaction**.

<img src="media/image177.png"
style="width:0.90764in;height:1.54653in" />

[another
image](https://image.slidesharecdn.com/basicsoforganic-141011234053-conversion-gate01/95/basics-of-organic-20-638.jpg?cb=1413071066)

fig 28

When a charged species (an ion) interacts favorably with a polar
molecule or functional group, the result is called an **ion-dipole
interaction**. A common example of ion-dipole interaction in biological
organic chemistry is that between a metal cation, most often
Mg<sup>+2</sup> or Zn<sup>+2</sup>, and the partially negative oxygen of
a carbonyl.

<img src="media/image178.png"
style="width:2.01875in;height:1.76875in" />

fig 29

Because the metal cation is very electronegative, this interaction has
the effect of pulling electron density in the carbonyl double bond even
further toward the oxygen side, increasing the partial positive charge
on carbon.  As we shall later, this has important implications in terms
of the reactivity of carbonyl groups in biochemical reactions.

### 2.4C: Van der Waals forces

Nonpolar molecules such as hydrocarbons also are subject to relatively
weak but still significant attractive noncovalent forces. [**Van der
Waals
forces**](https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/courses-images-archive-read-only/wp-content/uploads/sites/887/2015/06/23214344/CNX_Chem_10_01_DispForces.jpg)
(also called **London dispersion forces** or **nonpolar interactions**)
result from the constantly shifting electron density in any molecule.
Even a nonpolar molecule will, at any given moment, have a weak,
short-lived dipole. This transient dipole will induce a neighboring
nonpolar molecule to develop a corresponding transient dipole of its
own, with the end result that a transient dipole-dipole interaction is
formed. These van der Waals forces are relatively weak, but are
constantly forming and dissipating among closely-packed nonpolar
molecules, and when added up the cumulative effect can become
significant.

### 2.4D: Hydrogen bonds

**Hydrogen bonds** result from the interaction between a hydrogen bonded
to an electronegative heteroatom – specifically a nitrogen, oxygen, or
fluorine – and lone-pair electrons on a nitrogen, oxygen, or fluorine a
neighboring molecule or functional group. Because a hydrogen atom is
just a single proton and a single electron, when it loses electron
density in a polar bond it essentially becomes an approximation of a
‘naked’ proton, capable of forming a strong interaction with a lone pair
on a neighboring electronegative atom.

<img src="media/image179.png"
style="width:4.97222in;height:1.54653in" />

fig 30

Hydrogen bonds are usually depicted with dotted lines in chemical
structures. A group that provides a proton to a hydrogen bond is said to
be acting as a **hydrogen bond donor**. A group that provides an oxygen
or nitrogen lone pair is said to be acting as a **hydrogen bond
acceptor**. Many common organic functional groups can participate in the
formation of hydrogen bonds, either as donors, acceptors, or both. Water
and alcohols, for example, can be both hydrogen bond donors and
acceptors. A carbonyl, as it lacks a hydrogen bound to an oxygen or
nitrogen, can only act as a hydrogen bond acceptor.

<u>Exercise 2.28:</u> Classify the structures below as: A) capable of
being both a hydrogen bond donor and acceptor, B) capable of being a
hydrogen bond acceptor, but not a donor, or C) not capable of
participating in hydrogen bonding.

 <img src="media/image180.png"
 style="width:5.18542in;height:1.63889in" />

 fig 30A

<u>Exercise 2.29</u>: Draw figures that show the hydrogen bonds
described below.

a\) A hydrogen bond between methanol (donor) and water (acceptor).

b\) A hydrogen bond between methanol (acceptor) and water (donor).

c\) Two possible hydrogen bonds between methyl acetate and methylamine.

In general, hydrogen bonds are stronger than dipole-dipole interactions,
but also much weaker than covalent bonds. The strength of hydrogen bonds
has enormous implications in biology. Copying of DNA in the cell, for
example, is based on very specific hydrogen bonding arrangements between
DNA bases on complimentary strands: adenine pairs with thymine, while
guanine pairs with cytidine:

<img src="media/image181.png"
style="width:3.49097in;height:3.93542in" />

[Interactive model](http://www.chemtube3d.com/solidstate/DNAbases.htm)

Hydrogen bonds, as well as the other types of noncovalent interactions,
are very important in terms of the binding of a ligand to a protein. In
section 1.3D, we saw a 'space-filling' picture of an enzyme with its
substrate bound in its active site. Here, in a two-dimensional
approximation, is an image of the same substrate-enzyme pair showing how
amino acid side chain (green) and parent chain (blue) groups surround
and interact via hydrogen bonding with functional groups on the
substrate (red).

<img src="media/image182.png"
style="width:4.77778in;height:2.88889in" />

fig 30c

##  2.5: Physical properties of organic compounds

An understanding of the various types of noncovalent forces allows us to
explain, on a molecular level, many observable physical properties of
organic compounds. In this section, we will concentrate on solubility
(especially solubility in water), melting point, and boiling point.

### 2.5A: Solubility

Virtually all of the organic chemistry that you will see in this course
takes place in the solution phase. In the organic laboratory, reactions
are often run in nonpolar or slightly polar solvents such as toluene
(methylbenzene), dichloromethane, or diethylether. In recent years, much
effort has been made to adapt reaction conditions to allow for the use
of ‘greener’ (in other words, more environmentally friendly) solvents
such as water or ethanol, which are polar and capable of hydrogen
bonding. In biochemical reactions the solvent is of course water, but
the 'microenvironment' inside an enzyme's active site - where the actual
chemistry is going on - can range from very polar to very non-polar,
depending on which amino acid residues are present.

You probably remember the 'like dissolves like’ rule you learned in
general chemistry, and even before you took any chemistry at all, you
probably observed at some point in your life that oil does not mix with
water. Let’s revisit this rule, and put our knowledge of covalent and
noncovalent bonding to work.

When considering the solubility of an organic compound in a given
solvent, the most important question to ask ourselves is: how strong are
the noncovalent interactions between the compound and the solvent
molecules? If the solvent is polar, like water, then a smaller
hydrocarbon component and/or more charged, hydrogen bonding, and other
polar groups will tend to increase the solubility. If the solvent is
non-polar, like hexane, then the exact opposite is true.

Imagine that you have a flask filled with water, and a selection of
substances that you will test to see how well they dissolve in the
water. The first substance is table salt, or sodium chloride. As you
would almost certainly predict, especially if you’ve ever inadvertently
taken a mouthful of water while swimming in the ocean, this ionic
compound dissolves readily in water. Why? Because water, as a very polar
molecule, is able to form many ion-dipole interactions with both the
sodium cation and the chloride anion, the energy from which is more than
enough to make up for energy required to break up the ion-ion
interactions in the salt crystal.

<img src="media/image183.png"
style="width:5.79653in;height:1.11111in" />

fig 32

more images of NaCl:
[lattice](http://moorechemistry.weebly.com/uploads/8/9/4/4/8944539/217734.jpg),
[solution](http://wps.prenhall.com/wps/media/objects/3312/3391718/imag1301/AAAVSZU0.JPG)

The end result, then, is that in place of sodium chloride crystals, we
have individual sodium cations and chloride anions surrounded by water
molecules – the salt is now *in solution*. Charged species as a rule
dissolve readily in water: in other words, they are very **hydrophilic**
(water-loving).

Now, we’ll try a compound called biphenyl, which, like sodium chloride,
is a colorless crystalline substance.

<img src="media/image184.png"
style="width:1.23333in;height:0.76667in" />

fig 10

Biphenyl does not dissolve at all in water. Why is this? Because it is a
very non-polar molecule, with only carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen
bonds. It is able to bond to itself very well through nonpolar van der
Waals interactions, but it is not able to form significant attractive
interactions with very polar solvent molecules like water. Thus, the
energetic cost of breaking up the biphenyl-to-biphenyl interactions in
the solid is high, and very little is gained in terms of new
biphenyl-water interactions. Water is a terrible solvent for nonpolar
hydrocarbon molecules: they are very **hydrophobic** (water-fearing).

Next, you try a series of increasingly large alcohol compounds, starting
with methanol (1 carbon) and ending with octanol (8 carbons).

<img src="media/image185.png"
style="width:5.12986in;height:1.22222in" />

fig 33

You find that the smaller alcohols - methanol, ethanol, and propanol -
dissolve easily in water, at any water/alcohol ratio that you try. This
is because the water is able to form hydrogen bonds with the hydroxyl
group in these molecules, and the combined energy of formation of these
water-alcohol hydrogen bonds is more than enough to make up for the
energy that is lost when the alcohol-alcohol (and water-water) hydrogen
bonds are broken up. When you try butanol, however, you begin to notice
that, as you add more and more to the water, it starts to form a layer
on top of the water. Butanol is only sparingly soluble in water.

The longer-chain alcohols - pentanol, hexanol, heptanol, and octanol -
are increasingly non-soluble in water. What is happening here? Clearly,
the same favorable water-alcohol hydrogen bonds are still possible with
these larger alcohols. The difference, of course, is that the larger
alcohols have larger nonpolar, hydrophobic regions in addition to their
hydrophilic hydroxyl group. At about four or five carbons, the influence
of the hydrophobic part of the molecule begins to overcome that of the
hydrophilic part, and water solubility is lost.

Now, try dissolving glucose in the water – even though it has six
carbons just like hexanol, it also has five hydrogen-bonding,
hydrophilic hydroxyl groups in addition to a sixth oxygen that is
capable of being a hydrogen bond acceptor.

<img src="media/image186.png"
style="width:1.19444in;height:1.41667in" />

fig 34

We have tipped the scales to the hydrophilic side, and we find that
glucose is quite soluble in water.

We saw that ethanol was very water-soluble (if it were not, drinking
beer or vodka would be rather inconvenient!) How about dimethyl ether,
which is a constitutional isomer of ethanol but with an ether rather
than an alcohol functional group? We find that diethyl ether is much
less soluble in water. Is it capable of forming hydrogen bonds with
water? Yes, in fact, it is –the ether oxygen can act as a hydrogen-bond
acceptor. The difference between the ether group and the alcohol group,
however, is that the alcohol group is both a hydrogen bond donor *and*
acceptor.

<img src="media/image187.png"
style="width:3.90764in;height:1.61111in" />

fig 35

The result is that the alcohol is able to form more energetically
favorable interactions with the solvent compared to the ether, and the
alcohol is therefore much more soluble.

Here is another easy experiment that can be done (with proper
supervision) in an organic laboratory. Try dissolving benzoic acid
crystals in room temperature water – you'll find that it is not soluble.
As we will learn when we study acid-base chemistry in a later chapter,
carboxylic acids such as benzoic acid are relatively weak acids, and
thus exist mostly in the acidic (protonated) form when added to pure
water.

<img src="media/image188.png"
style="width:2.27778in;height:1.30556in" />

fig 36

Acetic acid (vinegar) is quite soluble. This is easy to explain using
the small alcohol vs large alcohol argument: the hydrogen-bonding,
hydrophilic effect of the carboxylic acid group is powerful enough to
overcome the hydrophobic effect of a single hydrophobic methyl group on
acetic acid, but not the larger hydrophobic effect of the 6-carbon
benzene group on benzoic acid.

Now, try slowly adding some aqueous sodium hydroxide to the flask
containing undissolved benzoic acid. As the solvent becomes more and
more basic, the benzoic acid begins to dissolve, until it is completely
in solution.

<img src="media/image189.png" style="width:5.07431in;height:1.5in" />

fig 37

What is happening here is that the benzoic acid is being converted to
its conjugate base, benzoate. The *neutral* carboxylic acid group was
not hydrophilic enough to make up for the hydrophobic benzene ring, but
the carboxylate group, with its *full negative charge*, is much more
hydrophilic. Now, the balance is tipped in favor of water solubility, as
the powerfully hydrophilic anion part of the molecule drags the
hydrophobic part into solution. Remember, charged species usually
dissolve readily in water. If you want to precipitate the benzoic acid
back out of solution, you can simply add enough hydrochloric acid to
neutralize the solution and reprotonate the carboxylate.

If you are taking a lab component of your organic chemistry course, you
will probably do at least one experiment in which you will use this
phenomenon to physically separate an organic acid like benzoic acid from
a hydrocarbon compound like biphenyl.

Similar arguments can be made to rationalize the solubility of different
organic compounds in nonpolar or slightly polar solvents. In general,
the greater the content of charged and polar groups in a molecule, the
less soluble it tends to be in solvents such as hexane. The ionic and
very hydrophilic sodium chloride, for example, is not at all soluble in
hexane solvent, while the hydrophobic biphenyl is very soluble in
hexane.

Because we are concentrating on the biologically relevant chemistry,
let's take a minute to review how to evaluate a compound's solubility in
water, the biological solvent:

**Summary of factors contributing to water solubility:**

A: How many carbons? All else being equal, more carbons means more of a
non-polar/hydrophobic character, and thus lower solubility in water.

B: How many, and what kind of hydrophilic groups? The more, the greater
the water solubility. In order of importance:

\#1) Anything with a **charged** group (eg. ammonium, carboxylate,
phosphate) is almost certainly water soluble, unless has a vary large
nonpolar group, in which case it will most likely be soluble in the form
of micelles, like a soap or detergent (see next section).

\#2) Any functional group that can **donate a hydrogen bond** to water
(eg. alcohols, amines) will significantly contribute to water
solubility.

\#3) Any functional group that can only **accept a hydrogen bond** from
water (eg. ketones, aldehydes, ethers) will have a somewhat smaller but
still significant effect on water solubility.

\#4) Other groups that contribute to polarity (eg. alkyl halides, thiols
sulfides) will make a small contribution to water solubility.

<u>Exercise 2.30:</u> Rank each set of three compounds below according
to their solubility in water (most soluble to least):

<img src="media/image190.png"
style="width:5.71319in;height:3.12986in" />

fig 37a

<u>Exercise 2.31</u>: Vitamins can be classified as water-soluble or
fat-soluble (consider fat to be a very non-polar 'solvent'. Decide on a
classification for each of the vitamins shown below.

<img src="media/image191.png" style="width:6in;height:1.57778in" />

fig 37b

<u>Exercise 2.32</u>: Both aniline and phenol are mostly insoluble in
pure water. Predict the solubility of these two compounds in 10% aqueous
hydrochloric acid, and explain your reasoning.

<img src="media/image192.png"
style="width:1.55556in;height:1.05556in" />

<u>Exercise 2.33</u>: Would you predict methanol or 2-propanol (rubbing
alcohol) to be a better solvent for cyclohexanone? Why?

Because water is the biological solvent, most biological organic
molecules, in order to maintain water-solubility, contain one or more
charged functional groups: most often phosphate, ammonium or
carboxylate.

<img src="media/image193.png" style="width:6in;height:1.64126in" />

fig 38

Note that the charge on these functional groups depends on their
protonation state: spermidine, for example, could be drawn with three
(uncharged) amine groups rather than the charged ammonium groups as
shown, and orotate could be drawn in the uncharged carboxylic acid form.
It turns out, however, that these three functional groups are all
charged when in a buffer at the physiological pH of approximately 7.3.
We will have much more to say about the acid-base aspects of these
groups in chapter 7.

Carbohydrates often lack charged groups, but as we discussed in our
‘thought experiment’ with glucose, they are quite water-soluble due to
the presence of multiple hydroxyl groups, which can hydrogen bond with
water.

Some biomolecules, in contrast, contain distinctly hydrophobic
components. Membrane lipids are **amphipathic**, meaning that they
contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic components. Cell membranes are
composed of membrane lipids arranged in a 'bilayer', with the
hydrophobic 'tails' pointing inward and the hydrophilic 'heads' forming
the inner and outer surfaces, both of which are in contact with water.

<img src="media/image194.png"
style="width:3.36667in;height:2.84444in" />

[another
image](http://academic.brooklyn.cuny.edu/biology/bio4fv/page/lipos.gif)

The nonpolar interior of the lipid bilayer is able to 'dissolve'
hydrophobic biomolecules such as cholesterol. Polar and charged
biomolecules, on the other hand, are not able to cross the membrane,
because they are repelled by the hydrophobic environment of the
bilayer's interior. The transport of water-soluble molecules across a
membrane can be accomplished in a controlled and specific manner by
special transmembrane transport proteins, a fascinating topic that you
will learn more about if you take a class in biochemistry.

A similar principle is the basis for the action of soaps and detergents.
Soaps are composed of fatty acids such as stearate obtained through
basic hydrolysis of triacylglycerols (section 1.3A) in fats and oils.

<img src="media/image195.png"
style="width:3.88889in;height:0.94444in" />

fig 39

[molecular
model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stearic_acid#/media/File:Stearic-acid-3D-balls.png)

Like membrane lipids, fatty acids are amphipathic. In aqueous solution,
the fatty acid molecules in soaps will spontaneously form **micelles**,
a spherical structure that allows the hydrophobic tails to avoid contact
with water and simultaneously form favorable van der Waals contacts with
each other.

<img src="media/image196.png"
style="width:1.26875in;height:1.46319in" />

[another
image](http://www.beautybythegeeks.com/wp-content/uploads/micelle-1024x644.png)*40*

Because the outside of the micelle is charged, the structure as a whole
is soluble in water. Micelles will form spontaneously around small
particles of oil that normally would not dissolve in water, and will
carry the particle away with it into solution. We will learn more about
the chemistry of soap-making in chapter 11.

Synthetic detergents are non-natural amphipathic molecules that work by
the same principle as that described for soaps.

<img src="media/image197.png"
style="width:5.88889in;height:1.82431in" />

fig 41

[Video tutorial:
solubility](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/chemistry/states-of-matter-and-intermolecular-forces/introduction-to-intermolecular-forces/v/solubility-of-organic-compounds-redo)

### 2.5B: Boiling point and melting point

The observable melting and boiling points of different organic molecules
provides an additional illustration of the effects of noncovalent
interactions. The overarching principle involved is simple: *how well
can a compound bind to itself*? Melting and boiling are processes in
which noncovalent interactions between identical molecules in a pure
sample are disrupted. The stronger the noncovalent interactions, the
more energy that is required, in the form of heat, to break them apart.

As a rule, larger molecules have higher boiling (and melting) points.
Consider the boiling points of increasingly larger hydrocarbons. More
carbons and hydrogens means a greater surface area possible for van der
Waals interaction, and thus higher boiling points. Below zero degrees
centigrade (and at atmospheric pressure) butane is a liquid, because the
butane molecules are held together by Van der Waals forces. Above zero
degrees, however, the molecules gain enough thermal energy to break
apart and enter the gas phase. Octane, in contrast, remains in the
liquid phase all the way up to 128<sup>o</sup>C, due to the increased
van der Waals interactions made possible by the larger surface area of
the individual molecules.

<img src="media/image198.png"
style="width:5.58333in;height:1.18542in" />

fig 42

The strength of intermolecular hydrogen bonding and dipole-dipole
interactions is reflected in higher boiling points. Look at the trend
for hexane (van der Waals interactions only), 3-hexanone (dipole-dipole
interactions), and 3-hexanol (hydrogen bonding). In all three molecules,
van der Waals interactions are significant. The polar ketone group
allows 3-hexanone to form intermolecular dipole-dipole interactions, in
addition to the weaker van der Waals interactions. 3-hexanol, because of
its hydroxyl group, is able to form intermolecular hydrogen bonds, which
are stronger yet.

<img src="media/image199.png"
style="width:5.24097in;height:1.60208in" />

fig 43

Of particular interest to biologists (and pretty much anything else that
is alive on the planet) is the effect of hydrogen bonding in water.
Because it is able to form tight networks of intermolecular hydrogen
bonds, water remains in the liquid phase at temperatures up to 100
<sup>O</sup>C despite its small size. The world would obviously be a
very different place if water boiled at 30 <sup>O</sup>C.

[Video tutorial: boiling
points](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pILGRZ0nT4o)

<u>Exercise 2.34</u>: Based on their structures, rank phenol, benzene,
benzaldehyde, and benzoic acid in terms of lowest to highest boiling
point. Explain your reasoning.

<img src="media/image200.png"
style="width:4.46667in;height:0.82222in" />

By thinking about noncovalent intermolecular interactions, we can also
predict relative melting points. All of the same principles apply:
stronger intermolecular interactions result in a higher melting point.
Ionic compounds, as expected, usually have very high melting points due
to the strength of ion-ion interactions. Just like with boiling points,
the presence of polar and hydrogen-bonding groups on organic compounds
generally leads to higher melting points. The size of a molecule
influences its melting point as well as its boiling point, again due to
increased van der Waals interactions between molecules.

What is different about melting point trends, that we don't see with
boiling point or solubility trends, is the importance of a molecule's
shape and its ability of pack tightly together*.* Picture yourself
trying to make a stable pile of baseballs in the floor. It just doesn't
work, because spheres don't pack together well - there is very little
area of contact between each ball. It is very easy, though, to make a
stack of flat objects like books.

The same concept applies to how well molecules pack together in a solid.
The flat shape of aromatic compounds allows them to pack efficiently,
and thus aromatics tend to have higher melting points compared to
non-planar hydrocarbons with similar molecular weights. Comparing the
melting points of benzene and toluene, you can see that the extra methyl
group on toluene disrupts the molecule's ability to pack tightly, thus
decreasing the cumulative strength of intermolecular van der Waals
forces and lowering the melting point.

<img src="media/image201.png"
style="width:2.93542in;height:1.21319in" />

fig 44

Note also that the boiling point for toluene is significantly above the
boiling point of benzene! The key factor for the boiling point trend in
this case is *size* (toluene has one more carbon), whereas for the
melting point trend, *shape* plays a much more important role. This
makes sense when you consider that melting involves ‘unpacking’ the
molecules from their ordered array, whereas boiling involves simply
separating them from their already loose (liquid) association with each
other.

<u>Exercise 2.35</u>: Which would you expect to have the higher melting
point, 2,3-dimethylbutane or hexane? Explain.

### 2.5C: Physical properties of lipids and proteins

<u>Lipids</u>

An interesting biological example of the relationship between molecular
structure and melting point is provided by the observable physical
difference between animal fats like butter or lard, which are solid at
room temperature, and vegetable oils, which are liquid. Recall (section
1.3A) that fats and oils are triacylglycerols: fatty acids linked to a
glycerol backbone. In vegetable oils, the fatty acid components are
unsaturated, meaning that they contain one or more double bonds. Solid
animal fat, in contrast, contains mainly saturated hydrocarbon chains,
with no double bonds.

<img src="media/image202.png"
style="width:4.38889in;height:3.38889in" />

fig 46

Molecular models: [palmatic
acid](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palmitic_acid#/media/File:Palmitic-acid-3D-balls.png),
[oleic
acid](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/27/Oleic-acid-3D-vdW.png)

The double bond(s) in vegetable oils cause those hydrocarbon chains to
be more rigid, and ‘bent’ at an angle (remember that rotation is
restricted around double bonds), with the result that they don’t pack
together as closely, and thus can be broken apart (melted) more readily.

In a related context, the fluidity of a cell membrane (essentially, the
melting point) is determined to a large extent by the length and degree
of unsaturation of the fatty acid 'tails' on the membrane lipids. Longer
and more saturated fatty acids make the membrane less fluid (they are
able maximize van der Waals interactions), while shorter and more
unsaturated fatty acids cause the membrane to be more fluid.

<u>Proteins</u>

The very same noncovalent forces we have just learned about are also
integral to protein structure: when a protein folds up, it does so in
such a way that very specific non-covalent interactions form between
amino acid residues on different regions of the chain, each one becoming
part of the 'molecular glue' that holds the chain together in its
correctly folded shape. Hydrogen bonds and charge-charge interactions
are particularly important in this respect. In general, the interior of
a folded protein is relatively hydrophobic, while the outside surface,
which of course is in constant contact with water, is very hydrophilic -
many charged side chains such as aspartate, glutamate, lysine, and
arginine point out of the surface of a protein structure.

Most of the proteins of 'mesophilic' organisms (those who thrive in
intermediate temperatures, including humans) will denature - come
unfolded - at high temperatures, as the heat disrupts the specific
noncovalent interactions holding the protein chain together. Unfolded
proteins usually are not water soluble because the more hydrophobic
interior regions are no longer hidden from the solvent, so denaturing is
accompanied by precipitation. Obviously, an unfolded protein also loses
its functionality.

In the last few decades, we have become aware that a wide variety of
microbes naturally inhabit extremely hot environments such as the
boiling water of [hot springs in Yellowstone National
Park](http://msnbcmedia.msn.com/j/MSNBC/Components/Photo/_new/pb-110603-yellowstone-hot-springs-eg-01.photoblog900.jpg),
or the base of a [deep-sea thermal
vent](http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/vents2.jpg). How do the
proteins of these 'thermophiles' hold up to the heat? There is nothing
extraordinary about these proteins that makes them so resistant to heat,
other than the fact that they have evolved so that they simply have
*more* molecular 'glue' holding them together - in particular, more
ionic interactions between oppositely charged residues. In just one of
many examples, the three-dimensional structure of an enzyme from
*Pyrococcus horikoshii*, a microbe isolated from a thermal vent deep in
the Pacific Ocean, was compared to a very similar enzyme in humans. The
thermophilic protein has a stabilizing charge-charge interaction between
the terminal carboxylate group on the last amino acid in the chain and
an arginine residue near the beginning of the chain.

<img src="media/image203.png"
style="width:5.58889in;height:1.76667in" />

fig 30b

This interaction is not present in the human version of the protein
because the terminal carboxylate group is angled away from the
positively-charged group on the arginine. The single charge-charge
interaction is not by itself responsible for the thermostability of *the
P. horikoshii* protein - other similar interactions throughout the
protein structure also contribute ([*PLOS* *Biology* 2011, *9*,
e1001027](http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.1001027)).

Conversely, proteins from 'psychrophilic' organisms - those which live
in extremely cold temperatures, such as in arctic soils or in small
water pockets in polar ice - have fewer stabilizing charge-charge
interactions. This gives them the flexibility to function at
temperatures in which mesophilic human or *E. coli* proteins would be
frozen and inactive. On the other hand, a typical psychrophilic protein
will rapidly unfold, precipitate, and lose its functionality at room
temperature.

Scientists are extremely interested in thermostable proteins, because
the ability to function at high temperatures can be a very desirable
trait for a protein used in industrial processes. In fact, thermostable
DNA polymerase from *Thermus aquaticus* (the enzyme is known to
molecular biologists as *'Taq* polymerase') is the enzyme that makes the
PCR (polymerase chain reaction) process possible, and has earned
billions of dollars in royalties for drug company Hoffman La Roche, the
patent owner. Many research groups are searching for useful enzymes in
thermophilic species, and others are working on ways to engineer heat
stability into existing mesophilic enzymes by tinkering with their amino
acid sequences to introduce new stabilizing charge-charge interactions.

**  
**

## Summary of Key Concepts

Understand **valence bond theory** and the **hybrid orbital** concept.
Be able to identify the hybridization of all carbons in any organic
molecule. Be able to accurately draw the π-bonding picture for a double
bond (side-by-side overlapping *p* orbitals). Be able to describe what
types of orbitals are overlapping to form the single and double bonds in
an organic molecule.

Be able to distinguish **conjugated double bonds** from **isolated
double bond**s. Be able to accurately draw the π-bonding picture for a
conjugated π system.

Understand the concept of **resonance**, and understand that **resonance
contributors** are *not* different molecules, just different ways of
drawing the same molecule.

Be able to draw resonance contributors correctly. Be able to draw
**curved arrows** between any two contributors.

**Major and minor resonance contributors**: be able to evaluate the
relative importance of contributors.

Understand the concept of resonance **delocalization** - what it means
when we say that a charge is delocalized, or that π electrons are
delocalized.

Recognize and understand **noncovalent interactions**: Van der Waals,
ion-ion, ion-dipole, dipole-dipole, and hydrogen bonding. Be able to
recognize whether a group is acting as a hydrogen bond donor or
acceptor.

Be able to use your knowledge of noncovalent intermolecular interactions
to predict trends in solubility, melting point, and boiling point.

## Problems

*In questions involving drawing resonance contributors, assume that all
second-row atoms should have a complete octet in all structures with the
exception of positively-charged carbons.*

**P2.1**: For each of the bonds indicated by arrows b-f in the figures
below, describe the bonding picture. An example is given for bond 'a'.
Note that for a double bond (bond 'c'), you will need to describe *two*
bonds. Note: you are being asked to describe the bonding picture for one
specific resonance contributor.

bond a: "this is a σ bond formed by the overlap of an *sp<sup>3</sup>*
orbital on one carbon and an *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbital on another
carbon."

<img src="media/image204.png"
style="width:4.12986in;height:1.71319in" />

**P2.2**:

a\) Draw curved arrows showing how each of the resonance contributors on
the left could be converted to the one on the right.

b\) Label contributors as major, minor, or approximately equivalent to
each other.

<img src="media/image205.png"
style="width:4.79653in;height:4.18542in" />

**P2.3:** Draw a 3D-accurate picture showing the orbitals involved in
bonding in the molecules below. Draw *all* bonds, both σ and π, as
overlapping orbitals. Indicate whether each orbital is *s, p, sp,
sp<sup>2</sup>*, or *sp<sup>3</sup>*, and indicate (with words or a
color scheme) orbitals that are pointed into or out of the plane of the
page. Locate all lone pairs in their appropriate orbitals. It is highly
recommended to check your drawing with your instructor or tutor.

An example is provided for ethene, CH<sub>2</sub>CH<sub>2</sub>:

<img src="media/image206.png"
style="width:3.41667in;height:1.49097in" />

a\) dimethyl ether (CH<sub>3</sub>OCH<sub>3</sub>)

b\) ethanol (CH<sub>3</sub>CH<sub>2</sub>OH)

c\) acetaldehyde (CH<sub>3</sub>COH)

d\) hydrogen cyanide (HCN)

**P2.4**: Neither of the pairs of structures below are pairs of
resonance contributors.

a\) Explain why not.

b\) What in fact is the relationship between them?

<img src="media/image207.png"
style="width:4.33333in;height:1.90764in" />

**P2.5:**

a-i) Describe the orbitals involved in the bonds indicated by the
arrows, as in problem 2.1.

<img src="media/image208.png"
style="width:5.27778in;height:4.18542in" />

**P2.6**: The four compounds below appeared in the October 9 and October
25, 2006 issues of Chemical and Engineering News.

a-k) For each bond indicated by an arrow, specify the types of orbitals
that are overlapping (for example, overlap between two *sp3*-hybridized
carbons would be denoted C*<sub>sp3</sub>*-C*<sub>sp3</sub>*)

l\) (functional group review) Which compound contains two aldehydes?
Which contains an ether? Which contains an amide? Which contains a
terminal alkene? Which contains an amine (and is this amine primary,
secondary, tertiary, or quaternary?)

m\) Give the molecular formula for the walking-stick compound

<img src="media/image209.png" style="width:5.25in;height:4.05556in" />

**P2.7:** Rank the bonds a-f below according to increasing bond length.

<img src="media/image210.png"
style="width:1.35208in;height:0.43542in" />

**  
**

**P2.8:** Redraw the structure below, showing the 2p<sub>z</sub>
orbitals that make up the conjugated π bond system.

<img src="media/image211.png"
style="width:0.88889in;height:0.77778in" />

**P2.9:** Draw two different (minor) resonance contributors of the
structure below (the flavin group of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD),
a biochemical oxidation/reduction molecule) in which the oxygen
indicated by an arrow bears a negative formal charge and one of the
circled atoms bears a positive formal charge. Include curved arrows to
account for the changing positions of electrons and π bonds.

<img src="media/image212.png"
style="width:1.97222in;height:1.37986in" />

**P2.10:** The structure below shows an intermediate species in a
reaction involving the amino acid alanine, attached to pyridoxal
phosphate (vitamin B6). Draw a resonance contributor in which the only
formal charges are on the oxygens.

<img src="media/image213.png"
style="width:1.79653in;height:1.88889in" />

**P2.11**: Below is the structure of the cholesterol-lowering drug
Lovastatin. Predict the trend in bond length for

a\) bonds a, b, c, and d

b\) bonds e and f

<img src="media/image214.png"
style="width:1.97222in;height:2.10208in" />

**P2.12:** In problem P1.10, you were asked to draw four different
amides with molecular formula C<sub>3</sub>H<sub>7</sub>NO. One of these
constitutional isomers is significantly less soluble in water than the
other three. Which one, and why?

**P2.13:** Below is the structure of Rimonabant, a drug candidate which
is being tested as a possible treatment for alcohol/tobacco dependence
and obesity (see *Chemical and Engineering News*, October 15, 2006, p.
24). Draw minor resonance contributors in which:

a\) there is a separation of charge between the nitrogen indicated by
the arrow and the oxygen.

b\) there is a separation of charge between a chlorine (positive) and
one of the three nitrogens.

<img src="media/image215.png" style="width:2.5in;height:1.65764in" />

**P2.14:** For the molecules below, draw minor resonance contributors in
which formal charges are placed on the atoms indicated by arrows. Use
curved arrows to show how you are rearranging electrons between
resonance contributors.

<img src="media/image216.png"
style="width:5.68542in;height:2.13889in" />

<img src="media/image217.png"
style="width:5.63889in;height:2.29653in" />

**P2.15:** Genipin was recently identified as the active compound in
gardenia fruit extract, a traditional Chinese medicine for the treatment
of diabetes (*Chemical and Engineering News* June 12, 2006, p. 34; *Cell
Metab*. 2006, *3*, 417). Resonance contributors can be drawn in which
the oxygen atom indicated by an arrow bears a positive formal charge.
Indicate where the corresponding negative formal charge would be located
in the most important of these contributors.

<img src="media/image218.png" style="width:1.46667in;height:1.6in" />

**P2.16:** Identify any *isolated* alkene groups in the PAC-1 structure
in problem P2.14, and in the genipin structure in problem P2.15.

**P2.17:** The February 27, 2006 issue of *Chemical and Engineering
News* contains an interesting article on the 100th birthday of Albert
Hofmann, the inventor of the hallucinogen LSD. The structure of LSD is
shown below. Several minor resonance contributors can be drawn in which
the nitrogen atom indicated by an arrow bears a positive formal charge.
Indicate atoms where a corresponding negative formal charge could be
located in these contributors.

<img src="media/image219.png"
style="width:2.08333in;height:2.52778in" />

**P2.18:** The human brain contains naturally occurring cannabinoid
compounds which are related in structure to
∆<sup>9</sup>-tetrahydrocannabinol, the active compound in cannabis.
Cannabinoids are thought to exert an antidepressant effect. Researchers
at the University of California, Irvine are studying synthetic
compounds, such as the one shown below, which inhibit the degradation of
natural cannabinoids in the brain. This compound has been shown to have
antidepressant-like effects in rats and mice. (*Chemical and Engineering
News*, December 19, 2005, p. 47; *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci*. *USA* 2005,
*102*, 18620.)

<img src="media/image220.png"
style="width:2.37986in;height:1.32431in" />

a\) Several minor resonance contributors can be drawn in which the
oxygen atom indicated by an arrow bears a positive formal charge.
Indicate atoms where a corresponding negative formal charge could be
located in these contributors.

b\) Answer the same question again, this time with the structural isomer
shown below.

<img src="media/image221.png"
style="width:2.93542in;height:1.61111in" />

**P2.19:** Give the expected trend (lowest to highest) in boiling points
for the following series of compounds.

<img src="media/image222.png"
style="width:4.26875in;height:3.30556in" />

P2.20: For each pair of molecules below, choose the one that is more
water-soluble, and explain your choice.

<img src="media/image223.png"
style="width:4.60208in;height:4.94444in" />

**P2.21:** Intermolecular forces: For *a-c* below, you may want to
review amino acid/protein structure basics in section 1.3D and Table 5
at the end of the book. Use abbreviations as appropriate to focus the
viewer's attention on the interaction in question.

a\) Which of the 20 natural amino acids have *side chains* capable of
forming hydrogen bonds with water?

b\) Draw a picture of a hydrogen bond in a protein between an alanine
main chain nitrogen and a glutamate side chain.

c\) Draw a picture of a hydrogen bond in a protein between a tyrosine
main chain (acting as donor) and a threonine side chain (acting as
acceptor).

d\) Draw a picture of an charge-charge (ionic) interaction in a protein
between an aspartate and a lysine.

**P2.22**: In properly folded protein structures, main chain nitrogens
often participate in hydrogen bonding interactions in the role of donor,
but rarely as acceptor. Speculate as to why this might be so, using what
you have learned in this chapter.

**P2.23:** Ozone, O<sub>3</sub>, is an uncharged, non-cyclic molecule.
Draw a Lewis structure for ozone. Are the two oxygen-oxygen bonds the
likely to be the same length? What is the bond order? Explain.

**P2.24:** Imagine that you hear a description of the bonding in water
as being derived directly from the atomic orbital theory, without use of
the hybrid orbital concept. In other words, the two bonds would be
formed by the overlap of the half-filled 2p<sub>y</sub> and
2p<sub>z</sub> orbitals of oxygen with the 1s orbitals of hydrogen,
while the two lone pairs on oxygen would occupy the 2s and
2p<sub>x</sub> orbitals. What is wrong with this picture? How would the
bonding geometry differ from what is actually observed for water?

**P2.25:**

a\) Draw a picture showing the geometry of the overlapping orbitals that
form the bonding network in allene, H<sub>2</sub>CCCH<sub>2</sub>. Then,
draw a Lewis structure for the molecule, using the solid/dash wedge bond
convention as necessary to indicate the correct geometry of the σ bonds.

b\) Draw a picture showing the geometry of the overlapping orbitals that
form the bonding network in carbon dioxide.

**P2.26** Below is the structure of ropinerol, a drug made by
GlaxoSmithKline for the treatment of Parkinson's disease. Is the
five-membered ring part of the aromatic system? Explain your answer.

<img src="media/image224.png"
style="width:1.77778in;height:1.71319in" />

**P2.27:** Classify each of the molecules/ions below as aromatic or not
aromatic. Explain your reasoning.

<img src="media/image225.png"
style="width:3.73333in;height:1.76667in" />

**P2.28:** For each of the compounds below, several minor resonance
contributors can be drawn in which the atom indicated by an arrow bears
a positive formal charge. Circle all atoms which could bear the
corresponding negative formal charge.

<img src="media/image226.png"
style="width:5.44444in;height:1.86667in" />

**P2.29:** For each of the compounds below, several minor resonance
contributors can be drawn in which the atom indicated by an arrow bears
a negative formal charge. Circle all atoms which could bear the
corresponding positive formal charge.

<img src="media/image227.png"
style="width:4.27778in;height:1.65556in" />

**  
**

**P2.30:** In each of the cation structures below, circle all carbon
atoms to which the positive formal charge can be delocalized by
resonance.

<img src="media/image228.png"
style="width:3.33333in;height:1.04444in" />

