# 7: Acid-base reactions

<img src="media/image536.jpg"
style="width:2.86736in;height:2.86736in" />

***Helicobacter pylori***

Credit: https://www.flickr.com/photos/ajc1/

The glass flask sitting on a bench in Dr. Barry Marshall's lab in Perth,
Western Australia, contained about thirty milliliters of a distinctly
unappetizing murky, stinking yellowish liquid.

A few days earlier, Dr. Marshall, in consultation with his mentor and
research partner Dr. J. Robin Warren, had poured a nutrient broth into
the flask, then dropped in a small piece of tissue sample taken from the
stomach of a patient suffering from chronic gastritis. Gastritis is an
inflammation of the stomach lining characterized by lingering pain,
nausea, and vomiting, and is often is the precursor to a peptic ulcer.
Now, after several days of incubating in a warm water bath, the flask
contained a living liquid culture, swarming with billions of bacterial
cells. According to the medical textbooks lining Dr. Marshall's
bookshelves, the bacteria should not have been there – nothing should
have grown in the broth, because the highly acidic environment inside
the stomach was supposed to be sterile. Also according to the textbooks,
the cause of his patient's stomach ailment was stress, or perhaps a poor
diet – but most definitely not a bacterial infection.

Dr. Marshall took a good, long, look at the contents of the flask. Then
he gave it a final swirl, and drank it down.

Five days later, his stomach started to hurt.

This is the story of how two doctors dared to think what no one else had
thought, and turned an established medical doctrine upside-down. Dr. J.
Robin Warren was a pathologist at the Royal Perth Hospital in Perth,
Western Australia. One day, when examining an image taken from a stomach
biopsy from a patient with severe gastritis, he noticed what appeared to
be spiral-shaped bacteria in the tissue, a surprising observation given
the medical consensus that bacteria could not live in the stomach.

The microbe-like shapes were very hard to see, but when he tried
treating the sample with a silver stain they became much more apparent.
He decided to start looking at silver-stained sections of every stomach
biopsy he examined, and before long he noticed a pattern: the presence
of the spiral bacteria coincided with gastritis in the patient, and the
tissues which were more severely inflamed seemed also to have more
bacteria present. Could there be a causal link between the bacteria and
the illness?

When he discussed his observations with colleagues, they dismissed the
results as coincidental contamination – nothing important.

Warren wasn't willing to just let it go. He was able to interest Barry
Marshall, a young internal medicine resident training at the same
hospital, in taking on a research project to try and solve the mystery
of the bacteria that were not supposed to exist. Marshall started by
doing a thorough search of the literature, and found that his mentor was
not the first to report seeing spiral-shaped bacteria in stomach tissue
– there were in fact several such observations in the literature, the
oldest going back to the middle of the 19<sup>th</sup> century. All of
them had been dismissed as unimportant artifacts.

Warren and Marshall started sending stomach biopsies from gastritis
patients to the microbiology lab in the hospital, to see if bacteria
from the samples could be cultured in a petri dish. For many months,
they got nothing. Then one Tuesday morning, right after the four-day
Easter holiday, Marshall got a call from an excited microbiology
technician: he had neglected to dispose of the latest round of test
cultures before going home for the holiday, and instead had left them in
the incubator the whole time. After growing for a full five days, the
dishes had colonies of bacteria growing in them. All this time, the
technicians had been throwing the cultures away after two days when no
bacterial growth was evident – standard procedure when working with
other bacteria – but apparently these bacteria were especially
slow-growing.

Now that he could culture the bacteria in the lab, he was able to
isolate and study them in more detail, and gave them the name
*Helicobacter pylori*. Marshall confirmed Warren's earlier observation
of a correlation between stomach bacteria and gastritis: only those
patients suffering from gastritis or ulcers seemed to have the bacteria
in their stomachs. There seemed to be strong evidence that *H. pylori*
infection led to gastritis, which in turn lead eventually to stomach
ulcers.

Despite the new data, Warren and Marshall's colleagues in the
gastroenterology field were still unconvinced of the link between
bacteria and gastritis or ulcers. Scientists are inherently skeptical
people, and it was difficult to overcome the long-entrenched theory that
the stomach was sterile, and that ulcers were caused by stress.
Interviewed much later by Discovery Magazine, Marshall recalled: “To
gastroenterologists, the concept of a germ causing ulcers was like
saying that the Earth is flat”.

Poring once more over the available literature, Marshall learned that
acid-reducing drugs – an enormously profitable product– were able to
relieve ulcer symptoms, but only temporarily. One interesting piece of
information stood out to him, though: an over-the-counter antacid
containing the element bismuth (similar the brand-name medicine
Pepto-Bismol) provided much longer-lasting relief compared to the other
drugs – and in some cases seemed to effect a permanent cure. Marshall
soaked a small circle of filter paper in the bismuth medicine, and
placed it on a petri dish that he had inoculated with *H. pylori*. After
five days in the incubator, there was a clear circle of non-growth
around the filter paper. The medicine had killed the bacteria.

Everything seemed to fit together: almost all patients with gastritis or
ulcers had *H. pylori* infections, and a drug which was able to kill the
bacteria was also effective against the stomach ailment. But to convince
the medical community that the root cause of ulcers was *H. pylori*
infection, Warren and Marshall needed more direct evidence: they had to
show that a healthy stomach – free from gastritis and uninfected by *H.
pylori* – would develop gastritis as a result of intentional infection,
and that clearing up the infection would also cure the gastritis. They
tried experiments with pigs first, then rats, and then mice, but to no
avail – they were not able to induce an *H. pylori* infection in the
animal models. Marshall was getting desperate: all around him he saw
patients suffering terribly, getting only temporary relief from acid
blockers and eventually needing to have parts of their stomachs removed,
and he was convinced that simple antibiotic therapy would cure them if
only their doctors could be convinced to try it. Because animal models
had failed, he decided to move to a model system that he knew would
work: humans. Ethical and regulatory considerations prevented him from
intentionally infecting human volunteers - so his only option was to use
himself as a guinea pig.

We are now at the point in the story where Barry Marshall, in the name
of science and medicine, took his disgusting but undeniably courageous
gulp of bacteria-laden broth. He had already undergone an endoscopy to
ascertain that his stomach was free from both inflammation and *H.
pylori*. As we already know, he started to develop symptoms of gastritis
about five days after drinking the bacteria – the same amount of time
that it took for *H. pylori* colonies to appear in the petri dish
cultures. After a few more days, he underwent another endoscopy, and was
overjoyed to be told that his stomach was indeed inflamed, and was
infested with spiral-shaped bacteria. He initially wanted to carry on
the experiment for a few more days of further tests, but his wife had a
different opinion on the matter and convinced him to begin antibiotic
treatment, which quickly cleared up both his infection and his stomach
inflammation.

Marshall and Warren now had clear, direct evidence that the stomach
inflammation which leads to ulcers was caused by bacteria, and could be
cured with antibiotics. They submitted a summary of their results for
presentation at a meeting of the Gastroenterological Society of
Australia, but were rejected. Apparently, 67 submissions had come in and
there was only time for 56 presentations; unfortunately their results
were not considered important enough to make the cut. They persevered,
and eventually published their findings in the June, 1984 issue of the
British medical journal *The Lancet.*

The paper gained some notice, especially from microbiologists, but did
not have an immediate impact in clinical practice. Around the world,
gastroenterologists continued to treat ulcers with acid blockers.
Outside of the mainstream medical community, however, word was getting
out that two Australian doctors had a cure for ulcers, and more people
started coming to them for treatment. Stories about Warren and Marshall
appeared in places like Reader's Digest and The National Enquirer, and
eventually in the United States the National Institutes of Health and
the Food and Drug Administration responded by fast-tracking the clinical
testing and approval process, and publicizing the new treatment option.

Stomach ulcers, which have been tormenting human beings since the
beginning of recorded history, are today considered an easily curable
condition, and the idea that they are caused by *H. pylori* infection is
fully accepted by the medical community. Drs. J. Robin Warren and Barry
Marshall shared the 2005 Nobel Prize in Medicine.

The now-discredited idea that the stomach is a sterile place made
perfectly good biochemical sense at the time: the stomach is like a
bathtub full of hydrochloric acid, which you probably recall from
previous chemistry classes and labs is a very strong, dangerously
corrosive acid. It is very difficult to imagine how a microbe could
survive in such an environment. We now know that *H. pylori* can thrive
there in part because its spiral shape allows it to burrow deep into the
protective layer of mucus that coats the stomach wall. In addition, *H.
pylori* cells produce large amounts of an enzyme called urease, which
catalyzes a reaction between urea and water to form carbon dioxide and
ammonia.

<img src="media/image537.png"
style="width:3.97222in;height:0.68542in" />

fig 1a

Ammonia - the main component of window-washing liquid - is a fairly
strong base, and reacts rapidly and completely with hydrochloric acid to
neutralize it.

<img src="media/image538.png"
style="width:3.58333in;height:0.66667in" />

fig1b

Although scientists are still unsure of all the details, it is likely
that these two protective strategies used by *H. pylori* somehow play a
role in causing the inflammation that can lead to peptic ulcers, where
the stomach lining becomes exposed to the harsh action of hydrochloric
acid.

The idea of acidity is at the heart of our story about the discovery of
*H. pylori*, and is the subject of this chapter. From here on in our
study of organic chemistry, we will be learning about how organic
molecules react, and how their structure determines their reactivity.
The reaction between an acid and a base - where a proton is donated from
the former and accepted by the latter - is the first kind of organic
reaction that we will explore. After reviewing some basic ideas about
acid-base equilibria with which you are probably already familiar from
General Chemistry, we will dive into some very challenging new waters,
as we attempt to use our understanding of organic structure to predict
how different organic functional groups will react in an acid-base
context. Many of the ideas that are introduced in this chapter, though
perhaps difficult to grasp at first, will be crucial to understanding
not only acid base chemistry but all of the other organic reaction types
that we will see throughout the remainder of the book.

<u>Additional reading</u>:

*Discover Magazine*, March 7, 2010. [*The Dr. Who Drank Infectious
Broth, Gave Himself an Ulcer, and Solved a Medical
Mystery*](http://discovermagazine.com/2010/mar/07-dr-drank-broth-gave-ulcer-solved-medical-mystery)

##  7.1: Overview of acid-base reactions

### 7.1A: The Brønsted-Lowry definition of acidity and basicity

We’ll begin our discussion of acid-base chemistry with a couple of
essential definitions. The first of these was proposed in 1923 by the
Danish chemist Johannes Brønsted and the English chemist Thomas Lowry,
and has come to be known as the **Brønsted-Lowry definition of acidity
and basicity**. An acid, by the Brønsted-Lowry definition, is a species
which acts as a proton donor, while a base is a proton acceptor. We have
already discussed in the previous chapter one of the most familiar
examples of a Brønsted-Lowry acid-base reaction, between hydrochloric
acid and hydroxide ion:

<img src="media/image539.png"
style="width:3.74097in;height:0.58333in" />

fig 1

In this reaction, a proton is transferred from HCl (the acid, or proton
*donor*) to hydroxide ion (the base, or proton *acceptor*). As we
learned in the previous chapter, curved arrows depict the movement of
electrons in this bond-breaking and bond-forming process.

After a Brønsted-Lowry acid donates a proton, what remains is called the
**conjugate base**. Chloride ion is thus the conjugate base of
hydrochloric acid. Conversely, when a Brønsted-Lowry base accepts a
proton it is converted into its **conjugate acid** form: water is thus
the conjugate acid of hydroxide ion.

Here is an organic acid-base reaction, between acetic acid and
methylamine:

<img src="media/image540.png"
style="width:5.05556in;height:1.22222in" />

fig 2

In the reverse of this reaction, acetate ion is the base and
methylammonium ion (protonated methylamine) is the acid.

<img src="media/image541.png" style="width:5.02778in;height:1.25in" />

fig 2

What makes a compound acidic (likely to donate a proton) or basic
(likely to accept a proton)? Answering that question is one of our main
jobs in this chapter, and will require us to put to use much of what we
learned about organic structure in the first two chapters, as well as
the ideas about thermodynamics that we reviewed in chapter 6.

For now, let's just consider one common property of bases: *in order to
act as a base, a molecule must have a reactive pair of electrons*. In
all of the acid-base reactions we'll see in this chapter, the basic
species has an atom with a lone pair of electrons. When methylamine acts
as a base, for example, the lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen atom
is used to form a new bond to a proton.

Clearly, methylammonium ion cannot act as a base – it does not have a
reactive pair of electrons with which to accept a proton.

<img src="media/image542.png" style="width:3.5in;height:1.07431in" />

fig 3

Later, in chapter 14, we will study reactions in which a pair of
electrons in a π bond of an alkene or aromatic ring act in a basic
fashion - but for now, will concentrate on the basicity of non-bonding
(lone pair) electrons.

<u>Exercise 7.1</u>: Complete the reactions below - in other words, draw
structures for the missing conjugate acids and conjugate bases that
result from the curved arrows provided.

<img src="media/image543.png"
style="width:3.51875in;height:2.51875in" />

fig 4

### 7.1B: The Lewis definition of acidity and basicity

The Brønsted-Lowry picture of acids and bases as proton donors and
acceptors is not the only definition in common use. A broader definition
is provided by the **Lewis definition of acidity and basicity**, in
which a **Lewis acid** is an electron-pair acceptor and a **Lewis base**
is an electron-pair donor. This definition covers Brønsted-Lowry proton
transfer reactions, but also includes reactions in which no proton
transfer is involved. The interaction between a magnesium cation
(Mg<sup>+2</sup>) and a carbonyl oxygen is a common example of a Lewis
acid-base reaction in enzyme-catalyzed biological reactions. The
carbonyl oxygen (the Lewis base) donates a pair of electrons to the
magnesium cation (the Lewis acid).

<img src="media/image544.png"
style="width:1.82431in;height:1.05556in" />

fig 5

While it is important to be familiar with the Lewis definition of
acidity, the focus throughout the remainder of this chapter will be on
acid-base reactions of the (proton-transferring) Brønsted-Lowry type.

##  7.2: The acidity constant

### 7.2A: Defining the acidity constant

You are no doubt aware that some acids are stronger than others. The
relative acidity of different compounds or functional groups – in other
words, their relative capacity to donate a proton to a common base under
identical conditions – is quantified by a number called the **acidity
constant**, abbreviated **K<sub>a</sub>**. The common base chosen for
comparison is water.

We will consider acetic acid as our first example. If we make a dilute
solution of acetic acid in water, an acid-base reaction occurs between
the acid (proton donor) and water (proton acceptor).

<img src="media/image545.png"
style="width:5.02778in;height:1.13889in" />

fig 7

Acetic acid is a weak acid, so the equilibrium favors reactants over
products - it is thermodynamically 'uphill'. This is indicated in the
figure above by the relative length of the forward and reverse reaction
arrows.

<img src="media/image546.png"
style="width:2.85208in;height:2.30556in" />

fig 7a

The equilibrium constant K<sub>eq</sub> is defined as:

<img src="media/image547.png"
style="width:2.97222in;height:0.55556in" />

fig 8

Remember that this is a dilute aqueous solution: we added a small amount
of acetic acid to a large amount of water. Therefore, in the course of
the reaction, the concentration of water (approximately 55.6 mol/L)
changes very little, and can be treated as a constant.

If we move the constant term for the concentration of water to the left
side of the equilibrium constant expression, we get the expression for
K<sub>a</sub>, the acid constant for acetic acid:

<img src="media/image548.png"
style="width:2.87986in;height:0.52778in" />

fig 9

In more general terms, the dissociation constant for a given acid HA or
HB<sup>+</sup> is expressed as:

<img src="media/image549.png"
style="width:5.91667in;height:0.91667in" />

fig 10

The value of K<sub>a</sub> for acetic acid is 1.75 x 10<sup>-5</sup> -
much less than 1, indicating there is much more acetic acid in solution
at equilibrium than acetate and hydronium ions.

Conversely, sulfuric acid, with a K<sub>a</sub> of approximately
10<sup>9</sup>, or hydrochloric acid, with a K<sub>a</sub> of
approximately 10<sup>7</sup>, both undergo essentially complete
dissociation in water: they are very strong acids.

A number like 1.75 x 10<sup>- 5</sup> is not very easy either to say,
remember, or visualize, so chemists usually use a more convenient term
to express relative acidity. The **pKa** value of an acid is simply the
log (base 10) of its K<sub>a</sub> value.

pKa = -log Ka Ka = 10<sup>-pKa</sup>

Doing the math, we find that the pKa of acetic acid is 4.8. The pKa of
sulfuric acid is

-10, and of hydrochloric acid is -7. The use of pKa values allows us to
express the relative acidity of common compounds and functional groups
on a numerical scale of about –10 (for a very strong acid) to 50 (for a
compound that is not acidic at all). ***The lower the pKa value, the
stronger the acid.***

The ionizable (proton donating or accepting) functional groups relevant
to biological organic chemistry generally have pKa values ranging from
about 5 to about 20. The most important of these are summarized below,
with *very rough* pKa values for the conjugate acid forms. More acidic
groups with pKa values near zero are also included for reference.

**Typical pKa values**

**group *approximate* pKa**

hydronium ion (H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup>) 0

protonated alcohol 0

protonated carbonyl 0

carboxylic acids 5

protonated imines 7

protonated amines 10

phenols 10

thiols 10

alcohols, water 15

α-carbon acids \* 20

*\*α-carbon acids will be explained in section 7.6A*

It is highly recommended to commit these rough values to memory now -
then if you need a more precise value, you can always look it up in a
more complete pKa table. The appendix to this book contains a more
detailed table of typical pKa values, and much more complete tables are
available in resources such as the *Handbook of Chemistry and Physics*.

**  
**

**pKa vs. pH**

It is important to realize that pKa is *not* the same thing as pH: the
former is an inherent property of a compound or functional group, while
the latter is a measure of hydronium ion concentration in a given
aqueous solution:

pH = -log \[H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup>\]

Knowing pKa values not only allows us to compare acid strength, it also
allows us to compare base strength. The key idea to remember is this:
***the stronger the conjugate acid, the weaker the conjugate base*.** We
can determine that hydroxide ion is a stronger base than ammonia
(NH<sub>3</sub>), because ammonium ion (NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup>, pKa
= 9.2) is a stronger acid than water (pKa = 15.7).

<u>Exercise 7.2</u>: Which is the stronger base,
CH<sub>3</sub>O<sup>-</sup> or CH<sub>3</sub>S<sup>-</sup>? Acetate ion
or ammonia? Hydroxide ion or acetate ion?

Let's put our understanding of the pKa concept to use in the context of
a more complex molecule. For example, what is the pKa of the compound
below?

<img src="media/image550.png"
style="width:3.62986in;height:1.61111in" />

fig 11

We need to evaluate the potential acidity of *four* different types of
protons on the molecule, and find the most acidic one. The aromatic
protons are not all acidic - their pKa is about 45. The amine group is
also not acidic, its pKa is about 35. (Remember, uncharged amines are
basic: it is positively-charged *protonated* amines, with pKa values
around 10, that are weakly acidic.) The alcohol proton has a pKa of
about 15, and the phenol proton has a pKa of about 10: thus, the most
acidic group on the molecule above is the phenol. (Be sure that you can
recognize the difference between a phenol and an alcohol - remember, in
a phenol the OH group is bound *directly* to the aromatic ring). If this
molecule were to react with one molar equivalent of a strong base such
as sodium hydroxide, it is the phenol proton which would be donated to
form a phenolate anion.

<u>Exercise 7.3</u>: Identify the most acidic functional group on each
of the molecules below, and give its approximate pKa.

<img src="media/image551.png"
style="width:5.30556in;height:2.57431in" />

fig 12

### 7.2B: Using pKa values to predict reaction equilibria

By definition, the pKa value tells us the extent to which an acid will
react with water as the base, but by extension we can also calculate the
equilibrium constant for a reaction between any acid-base pair.
Mathematically, it can be shown that:

K<sub>eq</sub> = 10<sup>∆pKa</sup>

where ∆pKa = (pKa of product acid minus pKa of reactant acid)

Consider a reaction between methylamine and acetic acid:

<img src="media/image552.png"
style="width:4.83333in;height:1.08333in" />

fig 13

The first step is to identify the acid species on either side of the
equation, and look up or estimate their pKa values. On the left side,
the acid is of course acetic acid while on the right side the acid is
methyl ammonium ion (in other words, methyl ammonium ion is the acid in
the reaction going from right to left). We can look up the precise pKa
values in table 7 (at the back of the book), but we already know
(because we have this information memorized, right?!) that the pKa of
acetic acids is about 5, and methyl ammonium is about 10. More precise
values are 4.8 and 10.6, respectively.

Without performing any calculations at all, you should be able to see
that this equilibrium lies far to the right-hand side: acetic acid has a
lower pKa, meaning it is a stronger acid than methyl ammonium, and thus
it wants to give up its proton more than methyl ammonium does. Doing the
math, we see that

K<sub>eq</sub> = 10<sup>∆pKa</sup> = 10<sup>(10.6 – 4.8)</sup> =
10<sup>5.8</sup> = 6.3 x 10<sup>5</sup>

So K<sub>eq</sub> is a very large number (much greater than 1) and the
equilibrium for the reaction between acetic acid and methylamine lies
far to the right-hand side of the equation, just as we had predicted.
This also tells us that the reaction has a negative Gibbs free energy
change, and is thermodynamically favorable.

<img src="media/image553.png"
style="width:2.85208in;height:2.30556in" />

fig 13b

If you had just wanted to quickly approximate the value of Keq without
benefit of precise pKa information or a calculator, you could have
approximated pKa \~ 5 (for the carboxylic acid) and pKa \~10 (for the
ammonium ion) and calculated in your head that the equilibrium constant
should be somewhere in the order of 10<sup>5</sup>.

<u>Exercise 7.4</u> Show the products of the following acid-base
reactions, and roughly estimate the value of Keq.

> <img src="media/image554.png" style="width:3.5in;height:3.45556in" />
>
> fig 14

### 7.2C: Organic molecules in buffered solution: the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation

The environment inside a living cell, where most biochemical reactions
take place, is an aqueous buffer with pH \~ 7. Recall from your General
Chemistry course that a buffer is a solution of a weak acid and its
conjugate base. The key equation for working with buffers is the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation:

**The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation**

<img src="media/image555.png"
style="width:3.10208in;height:0.51875in" />

fig 15

The equation tells us that if our buffer is an equimolar solution of a
weak acid and its conjugate base, the pH of the buffer will equal the
pKa of the acid (because the log of 1 is equal to zero). If there is
more of the acid form than the base, then of course the pH of the buffer
is lower than the pKa of the acid.

<u>Exercise 7.5</u>: What is the pH of an aqueous buffer solution that
is 30 mM in acetic acid and 40 mM in sodium acetate? The pKa of acetic
acid is 4.8.

The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation is particularly useful when we want
to think about the protonation state of different biomolecule functional
groups in a pH 7 buffer. When we do this, we are always assuming that
the concentration of the biomolecule is small compared to the
concentration of the buffer components. (The actual composition of
physiological buffer is complex, but it is primarily based on phosphoric
and carbonic acids).

Imagine an aspartic acid residue located on the surface of a protein in
a human cell. Being on the surface, the side chain is in full contact
with the pH 7 buffer surrounding the protein. In what state is the side
chain functional group: the protonated state (a carboxylic acid) or the
deprotonated state (a carboxylate ion)? Using the Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation, we fill in our values for the pH of the buffer and a rough pKa
approximation of pKa = 5 for the carboxylic acid functional group. Doing
the math, we find that the ratio of carboxylate to carboxylic acid is
about 100 to 1: the carboxylic acid is almost completely ionized (in the
deprotonated state) inside the cell. This result extends to all other
carboxylic acid groups you might find on natural biomolecules or drug
molecules: in the physiological environment, carboxylic acids are almost
completely deprotonated.

Now, let's use the equation again, this time for an amine functional
group, such as the side chain of a lysine residue: inside a cell, are we
likely to see a neutral amine (R-NH<sub>2</sub>) or an ammonium cation
(R-NH<sub>3</sub><sup>+</sup>?) Using the equation with pH = 7 (for the
biological buffer) and pKa = 10 (for the ammonium group), we find that
the ratio of neutral amine to ammonium cation is about 1 to 100: the
group is close to completely protonated inside the cell, so we will see
R-NH<sub>3</sub><sup>+</sup>, not R-NH<sub>2</sub>.

We can do the same rough calculation for other common functional groups
found in biomolecules.

**At physiological pH:**

Carboxylic acids are deprotonated (in the carboxylate anion form)

Amines are protonated (in the ammonium cation form)

Thiols, phenols, alcohols, and amides are uncharged

Imines are a mixture of the protonated (cationic) and deprotonated
(neutral) states.

We will talk about the physiological protonation state of phosphate
groups in chapter 9.

<u>Exercise 7.6</u>: The molecule below is not drawn in the protonation
state that we would expect to see it at physiological pH. Redraw it in
the physiologically relevant protonation state.

<img src="media/image556.png"
style="width:2.11111in;height:0.90764in" />

fig 16

While we are most interested in the state of molecules at pH 7, the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation can of course be used to determine the
protonation state of functional groups in solutions buffered to other pH
levels. The exercises below provide some practice in this type of
calculation.

<u>Exercise 7.7</u>: What is the ratio of acetate ion to neutral acetic
acid when a small amount of acetic acid (pKa = 4.8) is dissolved in a
buffer of pH 2.8? pH 3.8? pH 4.8? pH 5.8? pH 6.8?

<u>Exercise 7.8</u>: Would you expect phenol to be soluble in an aqueous
solution buffered to pH 2? pH 7? pH 12? Explain your answer.

<u>Exercise 7.9</u>: Methylamine is dissolved in a pH 9.0 buffer. What
percent of the solute molecules are charged? What is the average charge
on solute molecules?

<u>Exercise 7.10</u>: What is the approximate net charge on a
tetrapeptide Cys-Asp-Lys-Glu in pH 7 buffer?

##  7.3: Structural effects on acidity and basicity

Now that we know how to quantify the strength of an acid or base, our
next job is to gain an understanding of the fundamental reasons behind
*why* one compound is more acidic or more basic than another. This is a
big step: we are, for the first time, taking our knowledge of organic
*structure* and applying it to a question of organic *reactivity*. Many
of the ideas that we’ll see for the first here will continue to apply
throughout the book as we tackle many other organic reaction types.

### 7.3A: Periodic trends

First, we will focus on individual atoms, and think about trends
associated with the position of an element on the periodic table. We’ll
use as our first models the simple organic compounds ethane,
methylamine, and ethanol, but the concepts apply equally to more complex
biomolecules with the same functionalities, for example the side chains
of the amino acids alanine (alkane), lysine (amine), and serine
(alcohol).

**  
**

**Horizontal periodic trend in acidity and basicity**

<img src="media/image557.png"
style="width:3.82431in;height:3.19444in" />

fig 17

We can see a clear trend in acidity as we move from left to right along
the second row of the periodic table from carbon to nitrogen to oxygen.
The key to understanding this trend is to consider the hypothetical
conjugate base in each case*: the more stable (weaker) the conjugate
base, the stronger the acid*. Look at where the negative charge ends up
in each conjugate base. In the conjugate base of ethane, the negative
charge is borne by a carbon atom, while on the conjugate base of
methylamine and ethanol the negative charge is located on a nitrogen and
an oxygen, respectively. Remember from section 2.4A that
electronegativity also increases as we move from left to right along a
row of the periodic table, meaning that oxygen is the most
electronegative of the three atoms, and carbon the least.

*The more electronegative an atom, the better able it is to bear a
negative charge. Weaker bases have negative charges on more
electronegative atoms; stronger bases have negative charges on less
electronegative atoms.*

Thus, the methoxide anion is the most stable (lowest energy, least
basic) of the three conjugate bases, and the ethyl carbanion anion is
the least stable (highest energy, most basic). Conversely, ethanol is
the strongest acid, and ethane the weakest acid.

When moving vertically within a given column of the periodic table, we
again observe a clear periodic trend in acidity. This is best
illustrated with the haloacids and halides: basicity, like
electronegativity, increases as we move up the column.

**  
**

**Vertical periodic trend in acidity and basicity**

<img src="media/image558.png"
style="width:3.99097in;height:1.94444in" />

fig 18

Conversely, acidity in the haloacids increases as we move *down* the
column.

In order to make sense of this trend, we will once again consider the
stability of the conjugate bases. Because fluorine is the most
electronegative halogen element, we might expect fluoride to also be the
least basic halogen ion. But in fact, it is the *least* stable, and the
most basic! It turns out that when moving vertically in the periodic
table, the *size* of the atom trumps its electronegativity with regard
to basicity. The atomic radius of iodine is approximately twice that of
fluorine, so in an iodide ion, the negative charge is spread out over a
significantly larger volume:

<img src="media/image559.png"
style="width:2.52778in;height:1.30556in" />

fig 19

This illustrates a fundamental concept in organic chemistry:

*Electrostatic charges, whether positive or negative, are more stable
when they are ‘spread out’ over a larger area.*

We will see this idea expressed again and again throughout our study of
organic reactivity, in many different contexts. For now, we are applying
the concept only to the influence of atomic radius on base strength.
Because fluoride is the least stable (most basic) of the halide
conjugate bases, HF is the least acidic of the haloacids, only slightly
stronger than a carboxylic acid. HI, with a pKa of about -9, is almost
as strong as sulfuric acid.

More importantly to the study of biological organic chemistry, this
trend tells us that ***thiols are more acidic than alcohols***. The
pK<sub>a</sub> of the thiol group on the cysteine side chain, for
example, is approximately 8.3, while the pKa for the alcohol group on
the serine side chain is on the order of 17.

Remember the concept of 'driving force' that was introduced in section
6.2A? Recall that the driving force for a reaction is usually based on
two factors: relative charge stability, and relative total bond energy.
Let's see how this applies to a simple acid-base reaction between
hydrochloric acid and fluoride ion:

HCl + F<sup>-</sup> → HF + Cl<sup>-</sup>

<span id="_Toc80709062" class="anchor"></span>We know that HCl (pKa -7)
is a stronger acid than HF (pKa 3.2), so the equilibrium for the
reaction lies on the product side: the reaction is exergonic, and a
'driving force' pushes reactant to product.

What explains this driving force? Consider first the charge factor: as
we just learned, chloride ion (on the product side) is more stable than
fluoride ion (on the reactant side). This partially accounts for the
driving force going from reactant to product in this reaction: we are
going from less stable ion to a more stable ion.

What about total bond energy, the other factor in driving force? If you
consult a table of bond energies, you will see that the H-F bond on the
product side is more energetic (stronger) than the H-Cl bond on the
reactant side: 570 kJ/mol vs 432 kJ/mol, respectively). This also
contributes to the driving force: we are moving from a weaker (less
stable) bond to a stronger (more stable) bond.

### 7.3B: Resonance effects

In the previous section we focused our attention on periodic trends -
the differences in acidity and basicity between groups where the
exchangeable proton was bound to different elements. Now, it is time to
think about how the structure of different organic groups contributes to
their relative acidity or basicity, even when we are talking about *the
same element acting as the proton donor/acceptor*. The first model pair
we will consider is ethanol and acetic acid, but the conclusions we
reach will be equally valid for all alcohol and carboxylic acid groups.

Despite the fact that they are both oxygen acids, the pKa values of
ethanol and acetic acid are strikingly different. What makes a
carboxylic acid so much more acidic than an alcohol? As before, we begin
by considering the stability of the conjugate bases, remembering that a
more stable (weaker) conjugate base corresponds to a stronger acid.

<img src="media/image560.png"
style="width:5.46319in;height:2.99097in" />

fig 20

In both species, the negative charge on the conjugate base is located on
oxygen, so periodic trends cannot be invoked. For acetic acid, however,
there is a key difference: two resonance contributors can be drawn for
the conjugate base, and the negative charge can be delocalized (shared)
over two oxygen atoms. In the ethoxide ion, by contrast, the negative
charge is localized, or ‘locked’ on the single oxygen – it has nowhere
else to go. This makes the ethoxide ion much less stable.

Recall the important general statement that we made a little earlier:
'Electrostatic charges, whether positive or negative, are more stable
when they are ‘spread out’ than when they are confined to one location.'
Now, we are seeing this concept in another context, where a charge is
being ‘spread out’ (in other words, delocalized) *by resonance*, rather
than simply by the size of the atom involved.

The delocalization of charge by resonance has a very powerful effect on
the reactivity of organic molecules, enough to account for the
difference of over 12 pKa units between ethanol and acetic acid (and
remember, pKa is a log expression, so we are talking about a factor of
10<sup>12</sup> between the Ka values for the two molecules!)

The resonance effect also nicely explains why a nitrogen atom is basic
when it is in an amine, but *not* basic when it is part of an amide
group. Recall that in an amide, there is significant double-bond
character to the carbon-nitrogen bond, due to a minor but still
important resonance contributor in which the nitrogen lone pair is part
of a π bond.

<img src="media/image561.png"
style="width:5.74097in;height:3.15764in" />

fig 21

Whereas the lone pair of an amine nitrogen is ‘stuck’ in one place, the
lone pair on an amide nitrogen is delocalized by resonance. Notice that
in this case, we are extending our central statement to say that
*electron density* – in the form of a lone pair – is stabilized by
resonance delocalization, even though there is not a negative charge
involved. Here’s another way to think about it: the lone pair on an
amide nitrogen is not available for bonding with a proton – these two
electrons are too ‘comfortable’ being part of the delocalized π-bonding
system. The lone pair on an amine nitrogen, by contrast, is not so
comfortable - it is *not* part of a delocalized π system, and is
available to form a bond with any acidic proton that might be nearby.

If an amide group is protonated, it will be at the oxygen rather than
the nitrogen.

<u>Exercise 7.11:</u>

a\) Draw the Lewis structure of nitric acid, HNO<sub>3</sub>.

b\) Nitric acid is a strong acid - it has a pKa of -1.4. Make a
structural argument to account for its strength. Your answer should
involve the structure of the conjugate base of nitric acid.

<u>Exercise 7.12</u>: Rank the compounds below from most acidic to least
acidic, and explain your reasoning.

<img src="media/image562.png"
style="width:4.83333in;height:0.80556in" />

fig 22

<u>Exercise 7.13</u> (challenging): Often it requires some careful
thought to predict the most acidic proton on a molecule. Ascorbic acid,
also known as Vitamin C, has a pKa of 4.1 - the fact that this is in the
range of carboxylic acids suggest to us that the negative charge on the
conjugate base can be delocalized by resonance to *two* oxygen atoms.
Which if the four OH protons on the molecule is most acidic? Draw the
structure of ascorbate, the conjugate base of ascorbic acid, then draw a
second resonance contributor showing how the negative charge is
delocalized to a second oxygen atom. Hint - try deprotonating each OH
group in turn, then use your resonance drawing skills to figure out
whether or not delocalization of charge can occur.

<img src="media/image563.png"
style="width:1.46319in;height:1.71319in" />

fig 23

### 7.3C: Inductive effects

Compare the pKa values of acetic acid and its mono-, di-, and
tri-chlorinated derivatives:

<img src="media/image564.png"
style="width:4.62986in;height:0.96319in" />

fig 24

The presence of the chlorine atoms clearly increases the acidity of the
carboxylic acid group, but the argument here does not have to do with
resonance delocalization, because no additional resonance contributors
can be drawn for the chlorinated molecules. Rather, the explanation for
this phenomenon involves something called the **inductive effect**. A
chlorine atom is more electronegative than a hydrogen, and thus is able
to ‘induce’, or ‘pull’ electron density towards itself, away from the
carboxylate group. In effect, the chlorine atoms are helping to further
spread out the electron density of the conjugate base, which as we know
has a stabilizing effect. In this context, the chlorine substituent can
be referred to as an **electron-withdrawing group**. Notice that the
pKa-lowering effect of each chlorine atom, while significant, is not as
dramatic as the delocalizing resonance effect illustrated by the
difference in pKa values between an alcohol and a carboxylic acid. In
general, *resonance effects are more powerful than inductive effects*.

Because the inductive effect depends on electronegativity, fluorine
substituents have a more pronounced pKa-lowered effect than chlorine
substituents.

<img src="media/image565.png"
style="width:2.69444in;height:1.13889in" />

fig 25

In addition, the inductive takes place through covalent bonds, and its
influence decreases markedly with distance – thus a chlorine two carbons
away from a carboxylic acid group has a decreased effect compared to a
chlorine just one carbon away.

<img src="media/image566.png"
style="width:2.82431in;height:0.94444in" />

fig 26

<u>Exercise 7.14</u>: Rank the compounds below from most acidic to least
acidic, and explain your reasoning.

<img src="media/image567.png"
style="width:2.68542in;height:1.26875in" />

fig 27

##  7.4: Acid-base properties of phenols

Resonance effects involving aromatic structures can have a dramatic
influence on acidity and basicity. Notice, for example, the difference
in acidity between phenol and cyclohexanol.

<img src="media/image568.png"
style="width:1.88889in;height:1.35208in" />

fig 28

Looking at the conjugate base of phenol, we see that the negative charge
can be delocalized by resonance to three different carbons on the
aromatic ring.

<img src="media/image569.png"
style="width:4.27778in;height:2.82431in" />

fig 29

Although these are all minor resonance contributors (negative charge is
placed on a carbon rather than the more electronegative oxygen), they
nonetheless have a significant effect on the acidity of the phenolic
proton. Essentially, the benzene ring is acting as an
electron-withdrawing group by resonance.

As we begin to study in detail the mechanisms of biological organic
reactions, we’ll see that the phenol side chain of the amino acid
tyrosine (see table 5 at the back of the book), with its relatively
acidic pKa of 9-10, often acts as a catalytic proton donor/acceptor in
enzyme active sites.

<u>Exercise 7.15</u>: Draw the conjugate base of 2-napthol (the major
resonance contributor), and on your drawing indicate with arrows all of
the atoms to which the negative charge can be delocalized by resonance.

> <img src="media/image570.png" style="width:1.25in;height:0.88889in" />

fig 30

The base-stabilizing effect of an aromatic ring can be accentuated by
the presence of an additional electron-withdrawing substituent, such as
a carbonyl. For the conjugate base of the phenol derivative below, an
additional resonance contributor can be drawn in which the negative
formal charge is placed on the carbonyl oxygen.

<img src="media/image571.png" style="width:5.05556in;height:2in" />

fig 31

Now the negative charge on the conjugate base can be spread out over
*two* oxygens (in addition to three aromatic carbons). The phenol acid
therefore has a pKa similar to that of a carboxylic acid, where the
negative charge on the conjugate base is also delocalized to two oxygen
atoms. The ketone group is acting as an electron withdrawing group - it
is 'pulling' electron density towards itself, through both inductive and
resonance effects.

<u>Exercise 7.16</u>: The position of the electron-withdrawing
substituent relative to the phenol hydroxyl is very important in terms
of its effect on acidity. Which of the two substituted phenols below is
more acidic? Use resonance drawings to explain your answer.

<img src="media/image572.png"
style="width:2.08333in;height:1.26875in" />

fig 32a

<u>Exercise 7.17</u>: Rank the four compounds below from most acidic to
least.

<img src="media/image573.png"
style="width:4.72222in;height:1.01875in" />

fig 32

<u>Exercise 7.18</u>: Nitro groups are very powerful
electron-withdrawing groups. The phenol derivative picric acid has a pKa
of 0.25, lower than that of trifluoroacetic acid.

<img src="media/image574.png"
style="width:1.32431in;height:1.63889in" />

Use a resonance argument to explain why picric acid has such a low pKa.

Consider the acidity of 4-methoxyphenol, compared to phenol.

<img src="media/image575.png"
style="width:2.05556in;height:1.60208in" />

fig 34

Notice that the methoxy group increases the pKa of the phenol group - it
makes it *less* acidic. Why is this? At first inspection, you might
assume that the methoxy substituent, with its electronegative oxygen,
would be an electron-withdrawing group by induction. That is correct,
but only to a point. The oxygen atom does indeed exert an
electron-withdrawing inductive effect, but the lone pairs on the oxygen
cause the exact opposite effect – *the methoxy group is an
**electron-donating group by resonance***. A resonance contributor can
be drawn in which a formal negative charge is placed on the carbon
adjacent to the negatively-charged phenolate oxygen.

<img src="media/image576.png"
style="width:2.40764in;height:1.65764in" />

fig 35

Because of like-charge repulsion, this *destabilizes* the negative
charge on the phenolate oxygen, making it more basic. It may help to
visualize the methoxy group ‘pushing’ electrons towards the lone pair
electrons of the phenolate oxygen, causing them to be less 'comfortable'
and more reactive.

**When resonance and induction compete, resonance usually wins!**

The example above is a somewhat confusing but quite common situation in
organic chemistry - a functional group, in this case a methoxy group, is
exerting both an inductive effect and a resonance effect, *but in
opposite directions* (the inductive effect is electron-withdrawing, the
resonance effect is electron-donating). As stated earlier, as a general
rule a resonance effect is more powerful than an inductive effect - so
overall, the methoxy group is acting as an electron donating group.

<u>Exercise 7.19</u>: Rank the three compounds below from lowest pKa to
highest, and explain your reasoning. *Hint* - think about both resonance
and inductive effects!

<img src="media/image577.png"
style="width:3.26875in;height:0.86111in" />

f ig 36

##  7.5: Acid-base properties of nitrogen-containing functional groups

Many of the acid-base reactions we will see throughout our study of
biological organic chemistry involve functional groups which contain
nitrogen. In general, a nitrogen atom with three bonds and a lone pair
of electrons can potentially act as a proton-acceptor (a base) - but
basicity is reduced if the lone pair electrons are stabilized somehow.
We already know that amines are basic, and that the pKa for a protonated
amine is in the neighborhood of 10. We also know that, due to resonance
with the carbonyl bond, amide nitrogens are not basic (in fact they are
very slightly acidic, with a pKa around 20).

<img src="media/image578.png"
style="width:4.79653in;height:1.52778in" />

fig 38

Next, let's consider the basicity of some other nitrogen-containing
functional groups.

### 7.5A: Anilines 

Aniline, the amine analog of phenol, is substantially less basic than an
amine.

<img src="media/image579.png"
style="width:2.82431in;height:1.72222in" />

fig 39

We can use the same reasoning that we used when comparing the acidity of
a phenol to that of an alcohol. In aniline, the lone pair on the
nitrogen atom is stabilized by resonance with the aromatic π system,
making it less available for bonding and thus less basic.

<img src="media/image580.png"
style="width:5.26875in;height:1.19444in" />

fig 40

<u>Exercise 7.20</u>: With anilines just as with phenols, the resonance
effect of the aromatic ring can be accentuated by the addition of an
electron-withdrawing group, and diminished by the addition of an
electron-donating group. Which of the two compounds below is expected to
be more basic? Use resonance drawings to explain your reasoning.

<img src="media/image581.png"
style="width:2.72222in;height:1.50903in" />

### 7.5B: Imines

Imines are somewhat less basic than amines: pKa for a protonated imine
is in the neighborhood of 5-7, compared to \~10 for protonated amines.
Recall that an imine functional group is characterized by an
*sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybridized nitrogen double-bonded to a carbon.

<img src="media/image582.png"
style="width:1.97222in;height:1.40764in" />

fig 41

The lower basicity of imines compared to amines can be explained in the
following way:

- The lone pair electrons on an imine nitrogen occupy an
  *sp<sup>2</sup>* hybrid orbital, while the lone pair electrons on an
  amine nitrogen occupy an *sp<sup>3</sup>* hybrid orbital.

- *sp<sup>2</sup>* orbitals are composed of one part *s* and two parts
  *p* atomic orbitals, meaning that they have about 33% *s* character.
  *sp*<sup>3</sup> orbitals, conversely, are only 25% *s* character (one
  part *s*, three parts *p*).

- An *s* atomic orbital holds electrons closer to the nucleus than a *p*
  orbital, thus *s* orbitals are more electronegative than *p* orbitals.
  Therefore, sp<sup>2</sup> hybrid orbitals, with their higher
  *s*-character, are more electronegative than *sp<sup>3</sup>* hybrid
  orbitals.

- Lone pair electrons in the more electronegative *sp<sup>2</sup>*
  hybrid orbitals of an imine are held more tightly to the nitrogen
  nucleus, and are therefore less 'free' to break away and form a bond
  to a proton - in other words, they are less basic.

The aromatic compound pyridine, with an imine nitrogen, has a pKa of
5.3. Recall from section 2.2C that the lone pair electrons on the
nitrogen atom of pyridine occupy an *sp<sup>2</sup>*-hybrid orbital, and
are *not* part of the aromatic sextet - thus, they are available for
bonding with a proton.

> <img src="media/image583.png" style="width:2.5in;height:1.52778in" />

fig 42

### 7.5C: Pyrrole

In the aromatic ring of pyrrole, the nitrogen lone pair electrons *are*
part of the aromatic sextet, and are therefore much less available for
forming a new bonding to a proton. Pyrrole is a very weak base: the
conjugate acid is a strong acid with a pKa of 0.4.

<img src="media/image584.png"
style="width:3.41667in;height:1.47222in" />

fig 43

Below is a summary of the five common bonding arrangements for nitrogen
and their relative basicity:

| **nitrogen group** | **structure**                               | **pKa of conjugate acid**          |
|--------------------|---------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| amide              | <img src="media/image585.png"               
                      style="width:0.77778in;height:0.77778in" />  | NA (amide nitrogens are not basic) |
| amine              | <img src="media/image586.png"               
                      style="width:0.57431in;height:0.43542in" />  | \~ 10                              |
| imine              | <img src="media/image587.png"               
                      style="width:1.26875in;height:0.65764in" />  | \~ 5 - 7                           |
| aniline            | <img src="media/image588.png"               
                      style="width:0.49097in;height:0.85208in" />  | \~ 5                               |
| pyrrole            | <img src="media/image589.png"               
                      style="width:0.74097in;height:0.46319in" />  | \~ 0                               |

fig 44

Learning and being able to recognize these five different 'types' of
nitrogen can be very helpful in making predictions about the reactivity
of a great variety of nitrogen-containing biomolecules. The side chain
of the amino acid tryptophan, for example, contains a non-basic
'pyrrole-like' nitrogen (the lone pair electrons are part of the
10-electron aromatic system), and the peptide chain nitrogen, of course,
is an amide. The nucleotide base adenine contains three types of
nitrogen.

.

<img src="media/image590.png"
style="width:4.15556in;height:1.87778in" />

fig 45

The side chain on a histidine amino acid has both a 'pyrrole-like'
nitrogen and an imine nitrogen. The pKa of a protonated histidine
residue is approximately 7, meaning that histidine will be present in
both protonated and deprotonated forms in physiological buffer.
Histidine residues in the active site of enzymes are common proton
donor-acceptor groups in biochemical reactions.

<img src="media/image591.png"
style="width:4.32222in;height:1.86667in" />

fig 46

<u>Exercise 7.21</u>: Below are the structures of four 'coenzyme'
molecules necessary for human metabolism (we will study the function of
all of these in chapter 17).

<img src="media/image592.png" style="width:5.875in;height:4.27279in" />

fig 47

a\) When appropriate, assign a label to each nitrogen atom using the
basicity classifications defined in this section ('pyrrole-like', etc.).

b\) There is one nitrogen that does not fall into any of these types -
is it basic? Why or why not? What would be a good two-word term to
describe the group containing this nitrogen?

##  7.6: Carbon acids 

So far, we have limited our discussion of acidity and basicity to
heteroatom acids, where the acidic proton is bound to an oxygen,
nitrogen, sulfur, or halogen. However, **carbon acids** - in which the
proton to be donated is bonded to a carbon atom - play an integral role
in biochemistry.

### 7.6A: The acidity of α-protons

A hydrogen on an alkane is not at all acidic – its pKa is somewhere on
the order of 50, about as non-acidic as it gets in the organic chemistry
world. The reason for this is that if the hydrogen were to be
abstracted, the electrons from the broken bond would be localized on a
single carbon atom.

<img src="media/image593.png"
style="width:3.91667in;height:1.44444in" />

fig 48

Because carbon is not electronegative and is terrible at holding a
negative charge, such carbanion species are extremely unstable.

How, then, can a proton bonded to a carbon be acidic? Remember that an
acid becomes stronger if the conjugate base is stabilized, an in
particular if the negative charge on the conjugate base can be
delocalized to an electronegative atom such as an oxygen. This is
possible when a carbon is located adjacent to a carbonyl group.
Consider, for example, the conjugate base of acetone.

<img src="media/image594.png"
style="width:3.94444in;height:2.40764in" />

fig 49

One resonance contributor puts the negative charge on the carbon \#1.
Due to the presence of the adjacent carbonyl group, however, a second
resonance contributor can be drawn in which the negative charge is
located on the carbonyl oxygen, where it is much more stable. This type
of stabilized carbanion species is specifically referred to as an
**enolate**. Acetone is in fact weakly acidic, with a pKa of about 19.
The importance of the position of the carbonyl group is evident when we
consider 2-butanone: here, the protons on carbons \#1 and \#3 are
somewhat acidic (in the neighborhood of pKa = 20), but the protons on
carbon \#4 are not acidic at all, because carbon \#4 is not adjacent to
the carbonyl.

<img src="media/image595.png"
style="width:3.99097in;height:1.57431in" />

fig 50

A carbon that is located next to a carbonyl group is referred to as an
**α-carbon**, and any proton bound to it is an **α-proton**. In
2-butanone, carbons \#1 and \#3 are α-carbons, and their five protons
are α-protons. Carbon \#4 is a **β-carbon**, as it is two positions
removed from the carbonyl carbon

An **active methylene** is a carbon in the α position relative to *two*
carbonyl groups rather than just one. Protons on active methylene
carbons are more acidic than other α-protons, because the charge on the
conjugate base can be localized to *two* different oxygen atoms, not
just one. This keto-ester compound, for example, has a pKa of
approximately 11, close to that of phenol.

<img src="media/image596.png" style="width:5.5in;height:2.57431in" />

fig 51

As we alluded to above, the acidity of α-protons is an extremely
important concept in biological organic chemistry. Look through a
biochemistry textbook, and you will see reaction after reaction in which
the first mechanistic step is the abstraction of an α-proton to form an
enolate intermediate. Two chapters in this book (chapters 12 and 13) are
devoted to such reactions, and the initial proton-extraction step of
three example reactions are previewed below. Reaction A is from fatty
acid oxidation, while reactions B and C are both part of carbohydrate
metabolism.

> <img src="media/image597.png" style="width:5.25in;height:4.29653in" />

fig 52

<u>Exercise 7.22</u>: For each molecule shown below,

a\) Show the location of all α-protons.

b\) Draw the structure(s) of all possible enolate conjugate bases.

<img src="media/image598.png"
style="width:5.16667in;height:1.02778in" />

fig 53

### 7.6B: Keto-enol tautomers

An enolate ion can, of course, be reprotonated at the α-carbon to return
the molecule to the ketone or aldehyde form. An alternate possibility is
that the oxygen atom, rather than the α-carbon, could be protonated. The
species that results from this step is referred to as an **enol** (this
term reflects the fact that an enol contains structural elements of both
an akl**en**e and an alcoh**ol**).

<img src="media/image599.png"
style="width:3.22222in;height:1.30556in" />

fig53c

In fact, most ketones and aldehydes exist in rapid equilibrium with
their enol form. A ketone/aldehyde and its corresponding enol are
**tautomers**: a pair of constitutional isomers which can be rapidly and
reversibly interconverted, and which vary in terms of the site of
protonation and location of a double bond. As we will see going forward,
**tautomerization** - the interconversion of two tautomers - is a
ubiquitous step in biological organic chemistry. Often, when discussing
tautomerization, the ketone (or aldehyde) isomer is referred as the
**keto** form.

As a general rule, the keto form is lower in energy than the
corresponding enol form, and thus the keto form predominates at
equilibrium. Acetone, for example, is present at \>99% keto form at
equilibrium, and the enol form at less than 1%.

<img src="media/image600.png" style="width:3.75in;height:1.07431in" />

fig 53e

The 'driving force' for the enol to keto conversion can be understood in
terms of the energies of the three bonds involved in the process: the
sum of the three bond energies is about 48 kJ/mol greater in the keto
form than in the enol form.

<img src="media/image601.png"
style="width:4.43542in;height:2.16667in" />

fig 53d

<u>Exercise 7.23</u>: Draw all of the possible enol forms of the
following aldehydes/ketones.

a\) 3-pentanone

b\) acetaldehyde (IUPAC name ethaldehyde)

c\) cyclohexanone

d\) 2-pentanone

<u>Exercise 7.24</u>: Draw three examples of aldehyde or ketone
compounds for which there is no possible enol form.

<u>Exercise 7.25</u>: In some special cases, the enol form of a compound
is more stable than the keto form and thus predominates at equilibrium.
Curcumin is the compound mainly responsible for the characteristic
yellowish color of tumeric, a ubiquitous spice in south/southeast asian
cuisine. The extended system of π bonds present in the enol form causes
it to be lower in energy than the tautomer in which there are two ketone
groups (called the diketo form). Draw the diketo form of curcumin, and
explain how the conjugated π system is disrupted.

<img src="media/image602.png"
style="width:3.55556in;height:1.47222in" />

fig 53a

<u>Exercise 7.26</u>: The phenol functional group can also be thought of
a kind of enol.

a\) Draw the 'keto' form of phenol.

b\) The 'keto' form of phenol is highly disfavored compared to the
'enol' form - why?

Keto-enol tautomerization steps can be found in many biochemical
reactions. For example, there is an enol to keto tautomerization step in
the glycolysis reaction catalyzed by pyruvate kinase (EC 2.7.1.40).
Shown below is just the tautomerization part of this reaction; we will
see the complete reaction in chapter 9.

<img src="media/image603.png"
style="width:2.33333in;height:1.62986in" />

fig 53b

### 7.6C: Imine-enamine tautomers

Another common tautomeric relationship in biological organic chemistry
is the equilibrium between imines (also known as Schiff bases) and
**enamines**, which are essentially the nitrogen equivalents of enols.

Mechanism for imine - enamine tautomerization

<img src="media/image604.png"
style="width:2.87986in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 54a

The degradation of serine, for example, involves an enamine to imine
tautomerization step: (EC 4.2.1.13)

<img src="media/image605.png"
style="width:3.22222in;height:1.27778in" />

fig 54b

<u>Exercise 7.27</u>: The structures below all contain either an imine
or an enamine group. For each, draw the structure of an alternate
tautomer.

<img src="media/image606.png"
style="width:5.66667in;height:1.21319in" />

fig 54c

### 7.6D: Acidity of terminal alkynes

Terminal alkynes are another kind of carbon acid which are relevant more
to laboratory organic chemistry than to biological chemistry.

<img src="media/image607.png"
style="width:2.68542in;height:0.83333in" />

fig 54

Terminal alkynes are more acidic than alkenes or alkanes for the same
reason that protonated imines are more acidic than protonated amines:
the alkyne carbon is *sp*-hybridized, meaning that it has 50%
*s*-orbital character and is therefore more electronegative. With a pKa
of approximately 26, alkynes are only weakly acidic, but nonetheless can
be fully deprotonated through the use of a strong base such as sodium
amide (NaNH<sub>2</sub>).

<u>Exercise 7.28</u>: Hydrogen cyanide, HCN, is another example of a
relatively strong carbon acid, with a pKa of 9.2. Suggest a rationale
for the acidity of this proton.

##  7.7: Polyprotic acids

Polyprotic acids are capable of donating more than one proton. The most
important polyprotic acid group from a biological standpoint is
triprotic phosphoric acid. Because phosphoric acid has three acidic
protons, it also has three pKa values.

<img src="media/image608.png" style="width:5.75in;height:0.94444in" />

fig 55

The pKa values for any polyprotic acid always get progressively higher,
because it becomes increasingly difficult to stabilize the additional
electron density that results from each successive proton donation.
H<sub>3</sub>PO<sub>4</sub> is a strong acid because the (single)
negative charge on its conjugate base
H<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub><sup>-</sup> can be delocalized over two
oxygen atoms.

H<sub>2</sub>PO<sub>4</sub><sup>-</sup> is substantially less acidic,
because proton donation now results in the formation of an additional
negative charge: a –2 charge is inherently higher in energy than a –1
charge because of negative-negative electrostatic repulsion. The third
deprotonation, resulting in formation of a third negative charge, has an
even higher pKa. We will have more to say about the acidity of phosphate
groups in chapter 9, when we study the reactions of phosphate groups on
biomolecules.

<u>Exercise 7.29</u>: In a buffer at physiological pH, what form(s) of
phosphoric acid predominate? What is the average net charge?

Free amino acids are polyprotic, with pKa values of approximately 2 for
the carboxylic acid group and 9-10 for the ammonium group. Alanine, for
example, has the acid constants pKa<sub>1</sub> = 2.3 and
pKa<sub>2</sub> = 9.9.

<img src="media/image609.png"
style="width:5.61111in;height:1.07431in" />

fig 56

The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation tells us that alanine is almost fully
protonated and positively charged when dissolved in a solution that is
buffered to pH 0.5. At pH 7, alanine has lost one proton from the
carboxylic acid group, and thus is a **zwitterion** (it has both a
negative and a positive formal charge). At pH levels above 12, the
ammonium group is fully deprotonated, and alanine has a negative overall
charge.

Some amino acids (arginine, lysine, aspartate, glutamate, tyrosine, and
histidine) are triprotic, with a third pKa value associated with an
ionizable functional group on the side chain.

Many biological organic molecules have several potentially ionizable
functional groups and thus can be considered polyprotic acids. Citric
acid, found in abundance in oranges, lemons, and other citrus fruits,
has three carboxylic acid groups and pKa values of 3.1, 4.8, and 6.4.

<img src="media/image610.png"
style="width:1.93542in;height:1.02778in" />

##  7.8: Effects of enzyme microenvironment on acidity and basicity

Virtually all biochemical reactions take place inside the active site
pocket of an enzyme, rather than free in aqueous solution. The
**microenvironment** inside an enzyme's active site can often be very
different from the environment outside in the aqueous solvent. Consider,
for example, the side chain carboxylate on an aspartate residue in an
enzyme. The literature pKa of this carboxylic acid group is listed as
3.9, but this estimate assumes that the group is positioned on the
surface of the protein, exposed to water. In the physiological buffer of
pH \~ 7, a carboxylic acid group with pKa = 3.9 will be fully
deprotonated and negatively charged. If, however, an aspartate side
chain happens to be buried deep inside the interior of the protein’s
active site, and is surrounded primarily by nonpolar side chains such as
alanine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, etc., the situation is very
different.

<img src="media/image611.png"
style="width:2.18542in;height:1.77778in" />

fig 59

Cut off from the environment of the bulk solvent, the carboxylate group
(red in the above figure) is now in a very nonpolar microenvironment, a
situation in which the protonated, uncharged state is stabilized
relative to the deprotonated, negatively charged state (this is simply
another application of the 'like dissolves like' principle you learned
in General Chemistry - a charged group is highly destabilized by a
nonpolar environment). The overall effect is that the pKa for this
aspartate residue is actually higher than 3.9 – it is less acidic, and
more likely to be in its protonated form inside the protein.

A similar effect would be observed in a situation where the side chain
carboxylate groups of two aspartate residues are located in close
proximity to one another in an enzyme active site. Two negatively
charged groups close to each other represents a very high energy,
repulsive situation, and this can be relieved if one of the two side
chains is protonated.

<img src="media/image612.png"
style="width:5.08333in;height:1.21319in" />

fig 60

In this microenvironment, the proximity of one amino acid group directly
effects the pKa of its neighbor.

Now consider a situation where a metal ion such as magnesium
(Mg<sup>+2</sup>) or zinc (Zn<sup>+2</sup>) is bound in the interior of
the enzyme, in close contact with an aspartate side chain. With a cation
to interact with, the anionic, deprotonated state of the amino acid is
stabilized, so the pKa of this Asp residue is likely to be substantially
*lower* than 3.9.

<img src="media/image613.png"
style="width:2.11111in;height:1.01875in" />

fig 61

The metal ion in this situation is considered to be acting as a Lewis
acid, accepting electron density from the carboxylate group.

The pKa-lowering effect of a metal cation can be dramatic – it has been
estimated that a water molecule coordinated to a Cu<sup>+2</sup> or
Zn<sup>+2</sup> ion can have a pKa as low as 7 (compare this to the
‘normal’ water pK<sub>a</sub> of 15.7!) (*J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **1984**,
*106*, 630.)

<u>Exercise 7.30</u>: A lysine residue located deep in the interior of a
protein is surrounded by nonpolar residues. In what direction will this
alter the 'normal' pKa of the lysine side chain, and why?

<u>Exercise 7.31</u>: In many biochemical reactions which involve the
formation of an enolate intermediate, the carbonyl oxygen of the
substrate is coordinated to a divalent metal ion (usually zinc or
magnesium) in the active site. Explain, with structural drawings, how
this ion-dipole interaction effects the acidity of the α-protons of
dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP), an intermediate compound in the
glycolysis pathway.

> <img src="media/image614.png"
> style="width:1.49097in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 62

[Video tutorials: organic acid-base
chemistry](https://www.khanacademy.org/science/organic-chemistry/organic-structures/acid-base-review/v/acid-base-lewis-bronsted-lowry)~~  
~~**<u>Summary of key concepts</u>**

*Before you move on to the next chapter, you should:*

Know the **Bronsted-Lowry** **definition of acidity and** basicity: a
Bronsted acid is a proton donor, a Bronsted base is a proton acceptor.

Know the **Lewis definition of acidity and basicity**: a Lewis acid is
an electron acceptor, a Lewis base is an electron donor.

Understand that the Lewis definition is broader: all Bronsted acids are
also Lewis acids, but not all Lewis acids are also Bronsted acids.

Be able to draw a curved arrow mechanism for both Bronsted and Lewis
acid-base reactions.

Know the expressions for **Ka** and **pKa**.

Commit to memory the approximate pKa values for the following functional
groups:

H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup>, protonated alcohol, protonated carbonyl (\~
0)

carboxylic acids (\~ 5)

imines (\~ 7)

protonated amines, phenols, thiols (\~ 10)

water, alcohols (\~ 15)

α-carbon acids (\~ 20)

Be able to use pKa values to compare acidity: a lower pKa corresponds to
a stronger acid.

Know that:

> For a given pair of acids, the stronger acid will have the weaker
> conjugate base.
>
> For a given pair of basic compounds, the stronger base will have the
> weaker conjugate acid.

Be able to identify the most acidic/basic groups on a polyfunctional
molecule.

Be able to calculate the equilibrium constant of an acid base equation
from the pKa values of the acids on either side of the equation.

Be able to use the **Henderson-Hasselbalch equation** to determine the
protonation state/charge of an organic compound in an aqueous buffer of
a given pH.

Understand the idea that the best way to compare the strength of two
acids is to compare the stability of their conjugate bases: the more
stable (weaker) the conjugate base, the stronger the acid.

Be able to compare the acidity or basicity of compounds based on
**periodic trends**:

> acidity increases left to right on the table, so alcohols are more
> acidic than amines
>
> acidity increases top to bottom on the table, so a thiol is more
> acidic than an alcohol.

Be able to compare the acidity or basicity of compounds based on
protonation state: H<sub>3</sub>O<sup>+</sup> is more acidic than
H<sub>2</sub>O, NH<sub>4</sub><sup>+</sup> is more acidic than
NH<sub>3</sub>.

Understand how the **inductive effect** exerted by electronegative
groups influences acidity.

Understand how **resonance delocalization** of electron density
influences acidity.

Be able to explain/predict how orbital hybridization affects the
relative acidity of terminal alkynes, alkenes, and alkanes.

Be able to explain why phenols are more acidic than alcohols, and how
electron-withdrawing or donating groups influence the acidity of
phenols.

Be able to identify the relative basicity of a nitrogen-containg group
in a compound, based on whether it is an amine, amide, imine, aniline,
or 'pyrrole-like'.

Be able to identify **α-carbon**(s) on a carbonyl compound, and explain
why α−protons are weakly acidic. You should be able to draw the enolate
conjugate base of a carbonyl compound.

Be able to identify **tautomeric** relationships, specifically keto-enol
and imine-enamine tautomers.

Understand what a **polyprotic acid** is, what is meant by multiple pKa
values, and why these values get progressively higher.

~~  
~~

## Problems

**P7.1**: For each pair of molecules below, choose the stronger acid,
and explain your choice.

<img src="media/image615.png"
style="width:4.85208in;height:1.90764in" />

<img src="media/image616.png"
style="width:5.51875in;height:2.07431in" />

<img src="media/image617.png"
style="width:5.40764in;height:3.01875in" />

**P7.2:** For each pair of molecules below, choose the stronger base,
and explain your choice.

<img src="media/image618.png"
style="width:5.35208in;height:2.68542in" />

<img src="media/image619.png"
style="width:5.11111in;height:2.76875in" />

<img src="media/image620.png" style="width:5.25in;height:1.22222in" />

**P7.3:** Below are the structures of some well-known drugs.

a\) What is the most acidic proton on Lipitor? What is its approximate
pKa value?  
(Lipitor is a brand name for atorvastatin, a cholesterol-lowering drug.)

b\) What is the most acidic proton on Zocor? What is its approximate pKa
value?

(Zocor is a brand name for simvastatin, a cholesterol-lowering drug.)

c\) Where is the most basic site on Plavix? What is the approximate pKa
value of the conjugate acid? (Plavix is a brand name for clopidogrel, a
drug to prevent blood clots after a stroke.)

d\) Identify the most acidic proton on methadone, and draw the conjugate
base that would form if this proton were abstracted by a base.
(Methadone is an opiate used in the treatment of heroin addiction.)

<img src="media/image621.png"
style="width:5.54653in;height:3.93542in" />

**P7.4:**

a\) Porphobilinogen is a precuror to the biosynthesis of chlorophyll and
many other biological molecules. Draw the form of the molecule with a +1
net charge. What would the net charge of the molecule be at
physiological pH?

<img src="media/image622.png"
style="width:1.77778in;height:1.55556in" />

b\) Look up the structures of the hormones adrenaline and estrogen
(estrone). Estrogen can diffuse across a cell membrane, while adrenaline
cannot. Use your knowledge of cell membranes, physical properties of
organic molecules, and acid-base chemistry to explain this observation.

**P7.5:** Classify each of the nitrogen atoms in the coenzyme
S-adenosylmethionine as an amine, amide, 'aniline-like',
'pyridine-like', or 'pyrrole-like'. Which nitrogen is most basic? Which
is least basic?

<img src="media/image623.png"
style="width:2.71319in;height:1.76875in" />

**P7.6:** Uric acid, an intermediate in the catabolism (breakdown) of
the nucleotide adenosine, has four protons. Which would you expect to be
the least acidic? Use resonance structures to explain your reasoning.
*Hint*: consider protons 1-4 in turn, and what the conjugate base would
look like if each proton were donated to a base: how well could the
resulting negative charge be stabilized by resonance?

<img src="media/image624.png"
style="width:1.38889in;height:1.54653in" />

**P7.7:** Estimate the net charge on a peptide with the sequence
P-E-P-T-I-D-E (single-letter amino acid code), when it is dissolved in a
buffer with pH = 7 (don’t forget to consider the terminal amino and
carboxylate groups).

**P7.8:** Estimate the net charge on a dipeptide of sequence D-I.

a\) in a buffer with pH = 4.0

b\) in a buffer with pH = 7.3

c\) in a buffer with pH = 9.6

**P7.9:** Show the structures of species X and Y in the following
acid-base reactions, and estimate the value of Keq using the pKa table.
Assume that reactions involve equimolar amounts of acid and base.

<img src="media/image625.png"
style="width:5.54653in;height:5.16667in" />

**P7.10:** Locate the most basic site on the structure of the
hallucinogenic drug known as LSD.

<img src="media/image626.png"
style="width:1.66667in;height:2.55556in" />

**P7.11:**

a\) Identify the most acidic proton on the antibiotic tetracycline, and
explain your choice.

b\) Identify two additional protons which would be expected to have pKa
values close to 5.

<img src="media/image627.png"
style="width:2.33333in;height:1.62986in" />

**P7.12:** In an enzyme active site, a lysine side chain is surrounded
by phenylalanine, alanine, tryptophan, and leucine residues. Another
lysine side chain is located on the surface of the protein, pointing out
into the surrounding water. Which residue has the higher pKa, and why?

**P7.13:** (a-d) How would the immediate proximity of a magnesium ion
affect the pKa of the side chains of the following amino acids (relative
to the ‘typical’ pKa values given in the text)? Assume that all residues
are located in the interior of the protein structure, not in direct
contact with the outside buffer solution.

a\) a glutamate residue?

b\) a lysine residue?

c\) a histidine residue?

d\) a tyrosine residue?

e\) How would contact with a magnesium ion effect the pKa of a bound
water molecule in the interior of a protein?

**P7.14:** The side chain of lysine has a pKa of approximately 10.5,
while the pKa of the arginine side chain is approximately 12.5. Use
resonance structures to rationalize this difference.

**P7.15:** The α-protons of ketones are, in general, significantly more
acidic than those of esters. Account for this observation using
structural arguments.

**P7.16:** 2-amino-2-hydroxymethylpropane-1,3-diol, (commonly known as
'Tris') and imidazole are very commonly used as buffers in biochemistry
and molecular biology laboratories. You make two buffer solutions: One
is 50 mM Tris at pH 7.0, the other 50 mM imidazole/imidazolium at pH 7.0
For each solution, calculate the concentration of buffer molecules in
the cationic protonation state.

<img src="media/image628.png"
style="width:2.61111in;height:1.55556in" />

**P7.17**: The compound pictured below is an unusual carbon acid (pKa \~
16) that does not contain any heteroatoms. Explain why it is so much
more acidic than other hydrocarbons.

<img src="media/image629.png"
style="width:0.57431in;height:0.72222in" />

