# 15: Oxidation and reduction reactions

<img src="media/image530.jpeg" style="width:6in;height:3.99931in" />

photo credit: Johann Schwarz
(https://www.flickr.com/photos/blacksportsphotos/)

**Introduction**

Theo Ross was not doing very well at his summer job, and he was
frustrated. His boss had given him specific instructions, and yet Theo
kept botching the job, over and over again. Theo was not used to failure
– he had achieved almost perfect scores on both the ACT and SAT college
entrance exams, and was headed to Stanford University in the fall. Why
couldn't he get it right? It wasn't brain surgery, after all.

Well, actually – it *was* brain surgery.

An [April 17, 2014 article in *Sports
Illustrated*](http://mmqb.si.com/2014/04/17/mouse-concussions-nfl-cte)
tells Theo's story. Wanting to do something interesting over the summer
of 2010 before he started college, Theo had applied for a research
internship at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland.
This was an extremely competitive program normally reserved for
outstanding college students, but somehow Theo had managed to win a
coveted spot in the program, working with Dr. Dorian McGavern, a
neurologist studying how meningitis effects the brain. Dr. McGavern
assigned Theo the task of performing 'skull-thinning' surgery on mice,
part of which involved using a special saw to shave down a small section
of the bone in order to gain access to the brain. It was a delicate
procedure, something that even some experienced neurosurgeons who had
tried it had found challenging. Any small slip resulted in a concussion
to the mouse's brain, rendering it useless for the study. Theo just
couldn't get the hang of it, and ended up concussing one mouse after
another.

You have probably heard the old expression: “when life gives you lemons,
make lemonade”. Theo made a lot of lemonade that summer.

Theo and Dr. McGavern eventually realized that his failure at the
procedure actually presented an opportunity to observe what happens to a
brain right after a concussive injury. Theo started doing more
skull-thinning surgeries, but now the goal was to *cause* concussion,
rather than to avoid it. The concussed mice (who had been anaesthetized
prior to the surgery) were immediately strapped under a microscope so
that Theo could observe how their brains responded to the injury. This
was new, and very exciting stuff: most of what neurologists knew about
concussions up to that point had come from MRI (magnetic resonance
imaging – see chapter 5) or autopsies. Nobody knew very much about what
happens at the cellular level in a brain in the minutes and hours after
a concussion has occurred. In addition, the problem of traumatic head
injuries and the long-lasting effects they cause was becoming an
increasingly hot topic in the news, critically relevant to thousands of
veterans returning from Iraq and Afghanistan as well as to football
players and other athletes in contact sports– including Theo, who had
been a competitive wrestler in high school. (You might have been
wondering why Theo's story appeared in *Sports Illustrated* – now you
know.)

Theo spent the rest of that summer, and every spring break and summer
vacation over the next few years, working in McGavern's lab on the new
project. He and McGavern found evidence that the 'hidden' damage to a
concussed brain – that which went undetected in MRI scans but could come
back to haunt the victim years later in the form of recurring headaches,
memory loss, and depression – may be caused by a type of molecule
referred to as 'reactive oxygen species', or ROS, leaking from damaged
tissues into the brain. ROS are potentially harmful byproducts of
respiration such as hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) that
are constantly being produced in our cells. Although ROS can cause
serious oxidative damage if they are allowed to build up, our bodies
have evolved ways to deal with them, using so-called 'ROS scavengers' to
convert them to something innocuous like water.

With this new understanding, Theo and his mentor had another idea: what
if they could prevent the ROS from causing further damage to a recently
concussed brain by applying an scavenger to the injury? After some trial
and error, they found that an ROS scavenger compound called glutathione,
when applied directly to the skull of a concussed mouse within a few
minutes to three hours after the injury, could permeate the bone and
react with the ROS. Brain cells from these glutathione-treated mice
appeared normal, with none of the signs of ROS damage Theo was used to
seeing.

<img src="media/image531.png"
style="width:2.63889in;height:1.47222in" />

fig 1a

The road from an initial scientific discovery to a safe and effective
medical treatment is often a very long one, but Theo Roth and Dorian
McGavern appear to have made a discovery that could eventually help
prevent some of the most devastating and long-term damage caused by
traumatic head injuries. In the end, it's a very good thing that Theo's
hands were not cut out for brain surgery.

\*\*\*

The chemistry of oxidation and reduction - often called 'redox'
chemistry - is central to Theo Roth's discovery about what happens to a
concussed brain at the molecular level. This chapter is dedicated to
redox chemistry. We'll begin with a reminder of what you learned in
General Chemistry about the fundamentals of redox reactions in the
context of inorganic elements such as iron, copper and zinc: reduction
is a gain of electrons, and oxidation is a loss of electrons. Then,
we'll expand our understanding to include bioorganic redox reactivity,
examining among other things how alcohols are converted to ketones and
aldehydes, aldehydes are converted to carboxylic acids, and amines are
converted to imines. We will also talk about redox reactions in the
broader context of metabolism in living things.

A central player in some of the biochemical redox reactions we will see
is the coenzyme called glutathione, Theo Roth's 'magic bullet' molecule
that was able to rescue mouse brain cells from death by oxidation. We'll
see how glutathione acts as a mediator in the formation and cleavage of
disulfide bonds in proteins, and how it acts as an 'ROS scavenger' to
turn hydrogen peroxide into water.

**  
**

## Section 15.1: Oxidation and reduction of organic compounds - an overview

You are undoubtedly already familiar with the general idea of oxidation
and reduction: you learned in general chemistry that when a compound or
element is oxidized it loses electrons, and when it is reduced it gains
electrons. You also know that oxidation and reduction reactions occur in
tandem: if one species is oxidized, another must be reduced at the same
time - thus the term 'redox reaction'.

Most of the redox reactions you have seen previously in general
chemistry probably involved the flow of electrons from one metal to
another, such as the reaction between copper ion in solution and
metallic zinc:

Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + Zn<sub>(s)</sub> → Cu<sub>(s)</sub> +
Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub>

<u>Exercise 15.1</u>: Reading the reaction above from left to right,
which chemical species is being oxidized? Which is being reduced?

When we talk about the oxidation and reduction of organic compounds,
what we are mainly concerned with is the number of carbon-heteroatom
bonds in the compound compared to the number of carbon-hydrogen bonds.
(Remember that the term 'heteroatom' in organic chemistry generally
refers to oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, or a halogen).

> <u>Oxidation</u> of an organic compound results an *increase* in the
> number of carbon-heteroatom bonds, and/or a *decrease* in the number
> of carbon-hydrogen bonds.
>
> <u>Reduction</u> of an organic compound results in a *decrease* in the
> number of carbon-heteroatom bonds, and/or an *increase* in the number
> of carbon-hydrogen bonds.

Below are a number of common functional group transformations that are
classified as redox.

<img src="media/image532.png"
style="width:4.91667in;height:3.52778in" />

fig1

Heteroatoms such as oxygen and nitrogen are more electronegative than
carbon, so when a carbon atom gains a bond to a heteroatom, it *loses*
electron density and is thus being oxidized. Conversely, hydrogen is
less electronegative than carbon, so when a carbon gains a bond to a
hydrogen, it is *gaining* electron density, and thus being reduced.

<u>Exercise 15.2</u>: The hydration of an alkene to an alcohol is *not*
classified as a redox reaction. Explain.

For the most part, when talking about redox reactions in organic
chemistry we are dealing with a small set of very recognizable
functional group transformations. The concept of **oxidation state** can
be useful in this context. When a compound has lots of carbon-hydrogen
bonds, it is said to be in a lower oxidation state, or a more reduced
state. Conversely, if it contains a lot of carbon-heteroatom bonds, it
is said to be in a higher oxidation state.

We'll start with a series of single carbon compounds as an example.
Methane, in which the carbon has four bonds to hydrogen, is the most
reduced member of the group. The compounds become increasingly oxidized
as we move from left to right, with each step gaining a bond to oxygen
and losing a bond to hydrogen. Carbon dioxide, in which all four bonds
on the carbon are to oxygen, is in the highest oxidation state.

<img src="media/image533.png"
style="width:4.63889in;height:1.37986in" />

fig 3

More generally, we can rank the oxidation state of common functional
groups:

<img src="media/image534.png"
style="width:5.29653in;height:1.43542in" />

fig 4

The alkane oxidation state is the most reduced. Alcohols, thiols,
amines, and alkenes are all at the same oxidation state: therefore, a
reaction converting one of these groups to another - an alcohol to
alkene conversion, for example - is *not* a redox reaction. Aldehydes,
however, are at a higher oxidation state than alcohols, so an alcohol to
aldehyde conversion is an oxidation. Likewise, an imine to amine
conversion is a reduction, but an imine to ketone conversion is not a
redox reaction.

It is important to keep in mind that oxidation and reduction always
occurs in tandem: when one compound is oxidized, another compound must
be reduced. Often, organic chemists will use the terms **oxidizing
agent** and **reducing agent** to refer to species that are commonly
used, by human chemists or by nature, to achieve the oxidation or
reduction of a variety of compounds. For example, chromium trioxide
(CrO<sub>3</sub>) is a laboratory oxidizing agent used by organic
chemists to oxidize a secondary alcohol to a ketone, in the process
being reduced to H<sub>2</sub>CrO<sub>3</sub>. Sodium borohydride
(NaBH<sub>4</sub>) is a laboratory reducing agent used to reduce ketones
(or aldehydes) to alcohols, in the process being oxidized to
NaBH<sub>3</sub>OH.

<img src="media/image535.png"
style="width:5.71319in;height:2.99097in" />

There is a wide selection of oxidizing and reducing agents available for
use in the organic chemistry laboratory, each with its own particular
properties and uses. For example, while sodium borohydride is very
useful for reducing aldehyde and ketone groups to alcohols, it will not
reduce esters and other carboxylic acid derivatives. If you take a
course in synthetic organic chemistry, you will learn about the use of
many of these agents.

In this book, of course, we are concerned primarily with the organic
chemistry that occurs within a living cell. A large part of this chapter
will be spent looking at the action of two very important classes of
coenzymes - the nicotinamides and the flavins - that serve as
biochemical oxidizing and reducing agents. We also consider the
oxidation and reduction of sulfur atoms in thiol groups, especially the
thiol group on the side chain of cysteine residues in proteins.

<u>Exercise 15.3</u>: Each of the biochemical transformations shown
below is a step in amino acid metabolism. For each, state whether the
substrate is being oxidized, reduced, or neither oxidized nor reduced.

a\) (from aromatic amino acid biosynthesis)

<img src="media/image536.png"
style="width:3.24097in;height:1.55556in" />

b\) (from the biosynthesis of arginine and proline)

<img src="media/image537.png"
style="width:4.69444in;height:0.90764in" />

c\) (from the catabolism of lysine)

<img src="media/image538.png"
style="width:4.46319in;height:0.55556in" />

d\) (from the catabolism of tryptophan)

<img src="media/image539.png"
style="width:4.29653in;height:0.68542in" />

e\) (from the catabolism of serine)

<img src="media/image540.png"
style="width:3.30556in;height:1.22222in" />

## Section 15.2: Oxidation and reduction in the context of metabolism

Think back again to the redox chemistry that you learned in your general
chemistry course. A common experiment in a general chemistry lab is to
set up a galvanic cell consisting of a copper electrode immersed in an
aqueous copper nitrate solution, connected by a wire to a zinc electrode
immersed in an aqueous zinc nitrate solution.

<img src="media/image541.jpg"
style="width:5.60642in;height:2.99074in" />

(http://chemwiki.ucdavis.edu)

When the cell is completed with a salt bridge, an electrical current
begins to flow - what we have is a simple battery (figure a above). Over
time, the copper electrode gets heavier as metallic copper is deposited
on the copper cathode, while the zinc anode slowly dissolves into
solution (figure b above). The redox reaction occurring here is:

Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + Zn<sub>(s)</sub> → Cu<sub>(s)</sub> +
Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + energy

Electrons flow from zinc metal to copper cations, creating zinc cations
and copper metal: in other words, zinc metal is being oxidized to zinc
cation and copper cation is being reduced to copper metal, as expressed
by the two relevant half-cell reactions:

Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
Cu<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub>

Zn<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub> → Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> +
2e<sup>-</sup>

We can predict before we set up the cell that the spontaneous flow of
electrons will go in the zinc to copper direction, just by looking at a
table of **standard reduction potentials** (such a table was no doubt in
your general chemistry text).

**Standard reduction potentials at 25 <sup>o</sup>C**

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>Reduction half-reaction</strong></th>
<th><strong>Reduction potential (volts)</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Ag<sup>+1</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + e<sup>-</sup> →
Ag<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub></td>
<td>0.800</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
Cu<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub></td>
<td>0.337</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>H<sup>+1</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
H<sub>2(g)</sub></td>
<td><p>0</p>
<p><em>(standard)</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Pb<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
Pb<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub></td>
<td>-0.126</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Fe<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
Fe<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub></td>
<td>-0.441</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + 2e<sup>-</sup> →
Zn<sup>0</sup><sub>(s)</sub></td>
<td>-0.763</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Copper ion (Cu<sup>+2</sup>) has a higher standard reduction potential
than zinc ion (Zn<sup>+2</sup>), meaning that, under identical
conditions, more energy is released by reducing one mole of
Cu<sup>+2</sup> ion to Cu<sup>0</sup> metal than is released by reducing
one mole of Zn<sup>+2</sup> ion to Zn<sup>0</sup> metal.<sup>.</sup>
Another way to think about this is to imagine that the copper ion
'wants' to gain electrons more than the zinc ion does*.* Conversely,
zinc metal 'wants' to *lose* electrons more than the copper metal does.
Therefore, transfer of two electrons from zinc metal to Cu<sup>2+</sup>
is a thermodynamically downhill process, whereas the reverse process -
transfer of two electrons from copper metal to Zn<sup>2+</sup> - is
thermodynamically uphill.

Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + Zn<sub>(s)</sub> → Cu<sub>(s)</sub> +
Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + energy

Cu<sub>(s)</sub> + Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + energy →
Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + Zn<sub>(s)</sub>

Let's now extend the idea of redox reactions to the context of
metabolism in living things. When we 'burn' glucose for energy, we
transfer (by a series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions) electrons from
glucose to molecular oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>), oxidizing the six carbon
molecules in glucose to carbon dioxide and at the same time reducing the
oxygen atoms in O<sub>2</sub> to water. The overall chemical equation
is:

<img src="media/image542.png"
style="width:5.40764in;height:1.58333in" />

fig 8

The transfer of electrons from glucose to O<sub>2</sub> is a
thermodynamically downhill, energy-releasing process, just like the
transfer of electrons from zinc metal to copper ion. And while you could
have used the energy released by the zinc/copper redox reaction to light
a small light bulb, your cells use the energy released by the
glucose/oxygen redox process to carry out a wide variety of
energy-requiring activities, such as walking to your organic chemistry
lecture.

In your general chemistry copper/zinc experiment, was it possible to
reverse the reaction so that it runs in the uphill direction - in other
words, to oxidize copper and reduce zinc?

Zn<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub> + Cu<sub>(s)</sub> + energy →
Zn<sub>(s)</sub> + Cu<sup>+2</sup><sub>(aq)</sub>

Just ask yourself the question: is it possible to get water to flow
uphill? Of course it is - but only if you supply a pump and some energy!

The same idea applies to 'pumping' electrons uphill in your copper-zinc
electrochemical cell: all you need to do is to provide some energy in
the form of an external electrical current in order to pump the electron
flow in the uphill direction. You are recharging your battery.

Thinking again in a biochemical context: plants are able, by a process
called photosynthesis, to reduce carbon dioxide and oxidize water to
form glucose and molecular oxygen: essentially recharging the
ecosystem's biochemical battery using energy from the sun.

6CO<sub>2</sub> + 6H<sub>2</sub>O + energy →
C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>12</sub>O<sub>6</sub> + 6O<sub>2</sub>

On a global scale, oxidation of the carbons in glucose to CO<sub>2</sub>
by non-photosynthetic organisms (like people) and the subsequent
reductive synthesis of glucose from CO<sub>2</sub> by plants is what
ecologists refer to as the 'carbon cycle'.

In general the more reduced an organic molecule is, the more energy is
released when it is oxidized to CO<sub>2</sub> . Going back to our
single-carbon examples, we see that methane, the most reduced compound,
releases the most energy when oxidized to carbon dioxide, while formic
acid releases the least:

<img src="media/image543.png"
style="width:5.93542in;height:3.87986in" />

fig 9

A lipid (fat) molecule, where most of the carbons are in the highly
reduced alkane state, contains more energy per gram than glucose, where
five of the six carbons are in the more oxidized alcohol state (look
again at the glucose structure we saw just a couple of pages back).

<img src="media/image544.png"
style="width:4.83333in;height:2.01875in" />

fig 10

After we break down and oxidize sugar and fat molecules to obtain
energy, we use that energy to build large, complex molecules (like
cholesterol, or DNA) out of small, simple precursors. Many biosynthetic
pathways are *reductive*: the carbons in the large biomolecule products
are in a reduced state compared to the small precursors. Look at the
structure of cholesterol compared to that of acetate, the precursor
molecule from which all of its carbon atoms are derived - you can see
that cholesterol is overall a more reduced molecule.

<img src="media/image545.png"
style="width:4.85208in;height:1.52778in" />

fig 11

While we are focusing here on the mechanistic details of the individual
organic redox reactions involved in metabolism, if you take a course in
biochemistry you will learn much more about the bigger picture of how
all of these reactions fit together in living systems.

## Section 15.3: Hydrogenation of carbonyl and imine groups

Next, we'll go on to look at the actual chemical mechanisms involved in
the enzyme-catalyzed oxidation and reduction of biomolecules.

### 15.3A: An overview of hydrogenation and dehydrogenation

Many of the redox reactions that you will encounter when studying the
central metabolic pathways are classified as **hydrogenation** or
**dehydrogenation** reactions. Hydrogenation is simply the net addition
of a hydrogen (H<sub>2</sub>) molecule to a compound, in the form of a
**hydride ion** (H<sup>-</sup>, a proton plus a pair of electrons) and a
proton. ***Hydrogenation corresponds to reduction***. Dehydrogenation
reactions are the reverse process: loss of a hydride and a proton.
***Dehydrogenation corresponds to oxidation***.

<img src="media/image546.png"
style="width:4.46319in;height:1.74097in" />

fig 2

Hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions can also be called **hydride
transfer** reactions, because a hydride ion is transferred from the
molecule being oxidized to the one being reduced. In the next few
sections, we will learn about two important classes of coenzyme
molecules that serve **hydride ion acceptors** (oxidizing agents) and
**hydride ion donors** (reducing agents) in biochemical redox reactions.

Be careful not to confuse the terms *hyd**<u>rogen</u>**ation* and
*dehy**<u>drogen</u>**ation* with *hydration* and *dehydration* - the
latter terms refer to the gain or loss of *water*, while the former
terms refer to the gain or loss of *hydrogen*.

Many mechanistic patterns that we have already learned about in previous
chapters will come into play again in this discussion, with the only
variation being that here, a *hydride ion* will act as a nucleophile (in
the hydrogenation direction) or as a leaving group (in the
dehydrogenation direction). The key to understanding these reactions
will be to understand how a hydride can act as a nucleophile or leaving
group.

### 15.3B: Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide - a hydride transfer coenzyme

Although we are talking here about hydrides acting as nucleophiles and
leaving groups, you already know that *literal* hydride ions are far too
unstable to exist as discreet intermediates in the organic reactions of
living cells (the pKa of H<sub>2</sub>, the conjugate acid of hydride,
is about 35: a *very* weak acid, meaning hydride is a *very* strong base
and not a reasonable species to propose for a biochemical reaction). As
was alluded to earlier, biochemical hydrogenation/dehydrogenation steps
require the participation of a specialized hydride transfer coenzyme.
The most important of these is a molecule called **nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide**. The full structure of the oxidized form of this
coenzyme, abbreviated **NAD<sup>+</sup>**, is shown below, with the
active nicotinamide group colored blue. Because the redox chemistry
occurs specifically at the nicotinamide ring (in blue in the figure
below), typically the rest of the molecule is simply designated as an
'R' group.

<img src="media/image547.png"
style="width:5.22222in;height:1.97778in" />

fig 16

If the hydroxyl group indicated by the arrow is phosphorylated, the
coenzyme is called NADP<sup>+</sup>. The phosphate is located far from
the nicotinamide ring and does not participate directly in the hydride
transfer function of the cofactor. It is, however, important in a larger
metabolic context: as a general rule, redox enzymes involved in
catabolism (the breakdown of large molecules) typically use the
non-phosphorylated coenzyme, while those involved in anabolism
(biosynthesis of large molecules from small precursors) use the
phosphorylated coenzyme.

NAD<sup>+</sup> and NADP<sup>+</sup> both function in biochemical redox
reactions as **hydride acceptors**: that is, as oxidizing agents. The
reduced forms of the coenzyme, abbreviated NADH and NADPH, serve as
**hydride donors**: that is, as reducing agents.

<img src="media/image548.png" style="width:3.79653in;height:2in" />

fig 5

fig 17

To understand how the nicotinamide coenzymes function in hydride
transfer, let's look at a general picture of a reversible, redox
conversion from a ketone to a secondary alcohol. Mechanistically, the
reaction we are about to see can be described as a nucleophilic addition
to a carbonyl - a mechanism type we studied in chapter 10 - with the
twist that the nucleophilic species is a hydride ion. At the beginning
of the reaction cycle, both the ketone substrate and the NADH cofactor
are bound in the enzyme's active site, and carbon \#4 of the
nicotinamide ring is positioned very close to the carbonyl carbon of the
ketone.

NAD(P)H-dependent hydrogenation (reduction) of a ketone

<img src="media/image549.png"
style="width:2.46319in;height:0.79653in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image550.png" style="width:4.29653in;height:2.75in" />

fig 18, fig 18a

As an enzymatic group transfers a proton to the ketone oxygen, the
carbonyl carbon loses electron density and becomes more electrophilic,
and is attacked by a hydride from NADH. Because carbon \#4 of NADH is
bound in such close proximity to the electrophile, this step can occur
*without generating a free hydride ion intermediate* – the two hydride
electrons can be pictured as *shifting* from one carbon to another. Note
the products of this reaction: the ketone (which accepted a hydride and
a proton) has been reduced to an alcohol, and the NADH cofactor (which
donated a hydride) has been oxidized to NAD<sup>+</sup>.

The dehydrogenation of an alcohol by NAD<sup>+</sup> is simply the
reverse of a ketone hydrogenation:

NAD(P)<sup>+</sup>-dependent dehydrogenation (oxidation) of an alcohol

<img src="media/image551.png"
style="width:2.57431in;height:0.79653in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image552.png"
style="width:4.46319in;height:2.71319in" />

fig 19 fig 19a

An enzymatic base positioned above the carbonyl removes a proton, and
the electrons in the O-H bond shift down and push out the hydride, which
shifts over to carbon \#4 of NAD<sup>+</sup>. Note that the same process
with a primary alcohol would yield an aldehyde instead of a ketone.

<u>Exercise 15.4</u>: Draw general mechanisms for:

a\) hydrogenation of an imine

b\) dehydrogenation of an amine

<u>Exercise 15.5</u>: We just saw that when the nucleophile in a
nucleophilic carbonyl addition step is a hydride ion from NADH, the
result is a ketone/aldehyde hydrogenation reaction. As a review: what
kind of reaction step results when the nucleophile in this process is
not a hydride ion but a) an alcohol, or b) an enolate carbon?

The nicotinamide coenzymes also serve as hydride donors/acceptors in the
redox reactions interconverting carboxylic acid derivatives and
aldehydes. Notice that these reactions can be thought of as
*nucleophilic* *acyl substitution reactions* (chapter 11) in which the
nucleophile or leaving group is a hydride ion.

NAD(P)H-dependent hydrogenation (reduction) of a thioester to an
aldehyde:

<img src="media/image553.png"
style="width:2.94444in;height:0.87986in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image554.png"
style="width:5.52778in;height:2.47222in" />

fig 20 fig 20a

NAD(P)+-dependent dehydrogenation (oxidation) of an aldehyde to a
thioester:

<img src="media/image555.png"
style="width:3.01875in;height:0.74097in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image556.png"
style="width:5.04653in;height:2.80556in" />

fig 21 fig 21a

To simplify figures, hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions are
often drawn with the role of the coenzyme abbreviated:

<img src="media/image557.png"
style="width:2.22222in;height:3.11111in" />

fig 22

However, it is very important to make sure that you can remember and
draw out the full mechanism, including the role of the coenzyme, in
these types of reactions.

**Caution!** A very common error made by students learning how to draw
biochemical redox mechanisms is to incorrectly show nicotinamide
coenzymes acting as acids or bases. Remember: NADH and NADPH are
*hydride* donors, **NOT** proton donors. NAD<sup>+</sup> and
NADP<sup>+</sup> are *hydride* acceptors, **NOT** proton acceptors.

### 15.3C: Stereochemistry of ketone hydrogenation

It should not surprise you that the stereochemical outcomes of enzymatic
hydrogenation / dehydrogenation steps are very specific. Consider the
hydrogenation of an asymmetric ketone: In the hydrogenation direction,
attack by the hydride can occur from either the *re* or the *si* face of
an asymmetric ketone (see section 10.1C), leading specifically to the
*S* or *R* alcohol.

<img src="media/image558.png"
style="width:5.88889in;height:2.63889in" />

fig 23

The stereochemical configuration of the product depends on which side of
the ketone substrate the NAD(P)H coenzyme is bound in the active site.
Any given enzyme will catalyze its reaction with *one* of these two
stereochemical outcomes, not both.

Stereochemical considerations apply in the dehydrogenase direction as
well: in general, enzymes specifically catalyze the oxidation of either
an *R* or S alcohol, but not both.

<img src="media/image559.png"
style="width:3.37986in;height:1.94444in" />

fig 24

<u>Exercise 15.6:</u> During an intense workout, lactic acid forms in
muscle tissue as the result of enzymatic reduction of a ketone group in
the precursor molecule (EC 1.1.1.27). It is the lactate that you can
blame for the sore muscles you feel the day after a workout.

<img src="media/image560.png"
style="width:0.85208in;height:1.05556in" />

fig 25

a\) Draw the structure of the starting ketone in this reaction.

b\) Which face of the ketone is the coenzyme positioned next to in the
active site of the enzyme?

<u>15.3D: Examples of biochemical carbonyl/imine hydrogenation</u>

Now that we have covered the basics, let's look at some real examples of
hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions.

Glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.8) catalyzes one of the final
chemical steps in the breakdown of fat molecules. The enzyme
specifically oxidizes (*R*)-glycerol phosphate to dihydroxyacetone
phosphate. (*S*)-glycerol phosphate is *not* a substrate for this
enzyme. *J. Mol. Biol*. **2006**, *357*, 858 (human crystal structure)

<img src="media/image561.png"
style="width:4.93542in;height:2.24097in" />

fig 26

The reverse reaction (catalyzed by the same enzyme) converts
dihydroxyacetone phosphate to (*R*)-glycerol phosphate, which serves as
a starting point for the biosynthesis of membrane lipid molecules (see
section 1.3A).

<img src="media/image562.png"
style="width:4.69444in;height:1.79653in" />

fig 26a

<u>Exercise 15.7</u>: X-ray crystallography experiments reveal that in
the active site of glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase, a zinc cation
(Zn<sup>+2</sup>) is coordinated to the oxygen atom of the
carbonyl/alcohol group. How does this contribute to catalysis of the
reaction?

While the cell membranes of animals, plants, and bacteria are made from
lipids with the *R* stereochemistry exclusively, archaeal microbes (the
so-called 'third kingdom of life) are distinguished in part by the *S*
stereochemistry of their membranes.

<img src="media/image563.png"
style="width:5.33333in;height:3.05556in" />

fig 27

Archaea have an enzyme that catalyzes hydrogenation of dihydroxyacetone
with the opposite stereochemistry compared to the analogous enzyme in
bacteria and eukaryotes. This archaeal enzyme was identified and
isolated in 1997.

<img src="media/image564.png"
style="width:4.43542in;height:1.88889in" />

fig 28

In a reaction that is relevant to people who enjoy the occasional 'adult
beverage', an NADH-dependent enzyme (EC 1.1.1.1) in brewer's yeast
produces ethanol by reducing acetaldehyde. This is the final step in the
process by which yeast ferment glucose to ethanol.

<img src="media/image565.png"
style="width:2.54444in;height:1.06667in" />

fig 29

The reaction below, which is the final step in the biosynthesis of
proline (EC 1.5.1.2), is an example of an enzymatic reduction of an
imine to an amine. *J. Mol. Biol*. **2005**, *354*, 91.

<img src="media/image566.png"
style="width:4.05556in;height:2.27778in" />

fig 30

This step in the breakdown of the amino acids glutamate (EC 1.4.1.2)
provides an example of the oxidation of an amine to an imine:
*Structure* **1999**, *7*, 769.

<img src="media/image567.png"
style="width:2.90764in;height:1.90764in" />

The 'double reduction' reaction below (EC 1.1.1.34) is part of the
isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway, which eventually leads to cholesterol
in humans.

<img src="media/image568.png"
style="width:4.28889in;height:0.92222in" />

fig 32a

In this reaction, a thioester is first reduced to an aldehyde in steps
1a and 1b:

<img src="media/image569.png"
style="width:5.32431in;height:3.74097in" />

Then in step 2, the aldehyde is in turn reduced by the same enzyme (and
a second NADPH that enters the active site) to a primary alcohol. This
enzyme is inhibited by atorvastatin and other members of the statin
family of cholesterol-lowering drugs. Atorvastatin, marketed under the
trade name Lipitor by Pfizer, is one of the all-time best-selling
prescription medications.

Recall from chapter 11 that carboxylates are not reactive in acyl
substitution steps, so it follows that they cannot be *directly* reduced
to aldehydes by an enzyme in the same way that thioesters can. However,
a carboxylate can be converted to its 'activated' acyl phosphate form
(section 11.4), which can then be hydrogenated. An example of this is
found in a two-reaction sequence found in amino acid metabolism (EC
2.7.2.11; EC1.2.1.41).

<img src="media/image570.png"
style="width:5.85208in;height:1.19444in" />

fig 33

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.12) , a key enzyme in
the glycolysis pathway, provides an example of the oxidation of an
aldehyde to a thioester, in this case a thioester linkage between the
substrate and a cysteine residue in the enzyme's active site. In the
second phase of the reaction, the thioester intermediate is hydrolyzed
to free the carboxylate product.

<img src="media/image571.png"
style="width:5.68542in;height:3.08333in" />

fig 34

<u>Exercise 15.8</u>: Below is the final step in the biosynthesis of the
amino acid histidine (EC 1.1.1.23). Fill in the species that are
indicated with question marks. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A*. **2002**,
*99*, 1859

<img src="media/image572.png"
style="width:3.32431in;height:1.60208in" />

fig 35

<u>Exercise 15.9</u>: Draw a likely mechanism for the conversion of
glucose to sorbitol, a process that occurs in the liver. Do not
abbreviate the nicotinamide ring structure.

<img src="media/image573.png"
style="width:3.92222in;height:1.15556in" />

fig 35a

### 15.3E: Reduction of ketones and aldehydes in the laboratory

Although our focus in this book is biological organic reactions, it is
interesting to note that synthetic organic chemists frequently perform
hydrogenation reactions in the lab that are similar in many respects to
the NAD(P)H-dependent reactions that we have just finished studying. A
reagent called sodium borohydride (NaBH<sub>4</sub>) is very commonly
used, often in methanol solvent, to reduce ketones and aldehydes to
alcohols. The reagent is essentially a laboratory equivalent of NADH (or
NADPH): it serves as a source of nucleophilic hydride ions. Sodium
borohydride is a selective reagent in the sense that it will reduce
ketones and aldehydes but not carboxylic acid derivatives such as esters
(recall from section 11.2 and 11.3 that the carbonyl carbons of
carboxylic acid derivatives are less potent electrophiles than the
carbonyl carbons of ketones and aldehydes). Unlike the enzymatic
hydrogenation reactions we saw earlier, the reduction of asymmetric
ketones with sodium borohydride usually results in a 50:50 racemic
mixture of the *R* and *S* enantiomers of the alcohol product.

<img src="media/image574.png"
style="width:5.22222in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 36

Synthetic organic chemists have at their disposal a wide range of other
reducing and oxidizing reagents with varying specificities and
properties, many of which you will learn about if you take a course in
laboratory synthesis.

<u>Exercise 15.10</u>: Camphor can be easily reduced by sodium
borohydride. However, the mixture of stereoisomeric alcohols that
results is not 50:50.

<img src="media/image575.png"
style="width:0.71319in;height:1.29653in" />

fig 37

a\) Draw the two stereoisomers of the alcohol products of this reaction,
and explain why they are not formed in a 50:50 ratio.

b\) Which analytical technique - <sup>1</sup>H-NMR, IR, UV, or MS -
could best be used to determine the ratio of the stereoisomers in the
product mix? Describe how this analysis could be accomplished.

## Section 15.4: Hydrogenation of alkenes and dehydrogenation of alkanes

We turn next to reactions in which a hydrogen molecule is added to the
double bond of an alkene, forming an alkane - and the reverse, in which
H<sub>2</sub> is eliminated from an alkane to form an alkene. Many
biochemical reactions of this type involve α,β-unsaturated thioesters.

<img src="media/image576.png"
style="width:3.94444in;height:1.74097in" />

fig 38

### 15.4A: Alkene hydrogenation 

In the cell, alkene hydrogenation most often occurs at the α and β
position relative to a carbonyl. This type of alkene hydrogenation is
essentially a conjugate addition (section 11.4) of hydrogen, with a
hydride ion (often from NAD(P)H) acting as the nucleophile in the first
step.

NAD(P)H-dependent hydrogenation (reduction) of an α,β-conjugated alkene:

<img src="media/image577.png"
style="width:4.37986in;height:0.77778in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image578.png"
style="width:5.97222in;height:2.08333in" />

fig 39 fig 39a

As part of the fatty acid synthesis pathway, a double bond between the α
and β carbons of a fatty acid is reduced to a single bond by
hydrogenation (EC 1.3.1.10). The fatty acid is attached to an
acyl-carrier protein via a thioester linkage (section 11.5A).

<img src="media/image579.png"
style="width:4.02778in;height:0.90764in" />

fig 40

It can be easy to forget but important to remember that there is a lot
of stereospecificity inherent in biochemical reactions, including this
one - even though no chiral centers are involved. First, notice that the
substrate contains a *trans* (*E*) alkene. Next, let's add some more
information about *prochirality*:

<img src="media/image580.png"
style="width:4.36111in;height:2.33333in" />

fig40a

Notice that in this particular reaction it is specifically the *pro-R*
hydride on NADPH that is delivered to the substrate. Also notice that
both the hydride and proton are added to the *re* faces of the α and β
carbons of the substrate, and become the *pro-R* and *pro-S* hydrogen
atoms, respectively, on the product. This level of stereospecificity,
you should recall from previous discussions, stems from the highly
precise positioning of substrate and cofactor within the active site of
the enzyme.

Other hydrogenase enzymes are known to deliver the *pro-S* hydride of
NADH or NADPH to their substrate, and there are many examples of
biochemical conjugate addition reactions in which the nucleophile and
proton are added from *opposite* sides. Always keep in mind that
stereochemistry is a key element in the amazing diversity of biological
organic reactions.

### 15.4B: Flavin-dependent alkane dehydrogenation 

Next, let's consider an alkane dehydrogenation reaction (EC 1.3.99.3) in
the fatty acid degradation pathway. Here, a double bond is introduced
between the α and β carbons, with concurrent loss of a hydride ion and a
proton.

<img src="media/image581.png"
style="width:4.97222in;height:1.32431in" />

fig 41

This reaction is clearly *not* the reverse of the hydrogenation reaction
we just saw from fatty acid biosynthesis. First of all, you should
notice that the thioester linkage is to coenzyme A rather than acyl
carrier protein (ACP). More importantly to this discussion, while the
hydride donor in the biosynthetic hydrogenation reaction is NADPH, the
relevant coenzyme in the catabolic direction is *not* NAD<sup>+</sup> or
NADP<sup>+</sup> - rather, it is a **flavin coenzyme.**

**Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD**) is composed of three components:
the three-ring flavin system, ribose phosphate, and AMP. An alternate
form, which is missing the AMP component, is called **flavin
mononucleotide (FMN)**.

<img src="media/image582.png"
style="width:5.85208in;height:3.11111in" />

fig 42

The reactive part of the coenzyme is the flavin group, so usually the
rest of the molecule is abbreviated with 'R'.

FAD and FMN are the oxidized form of flavin. The reduced (hydrogenated)
forms of these cofactors are abbreviated FADH<sub>2</sub> and
FMNH<sub>2</sub>.

<img src="media/image583.png" style="width:3.97778in;height:2in" />

fig 43

The flavin coenzymes are synthesized in humans from riboflavin (vitamin
B<sub>2</sub>), which we obtain from our diet (the structure of
riboflavin is the same as that of FMN, except that riboflavin lacks the
phosphate group). Notice the extended conjugated π system in the three
fused rings: the flavin system absorbs light in the visible wavelengths
and has a distinctive deep yellow color - it is riboflavin, and to some
extent FAD and FMN, that give urine its color.

Like the nicotinamide coenzymes, flavin serves as a hydride donor or
acceptor. FAD and FMN are able to accept a hydride ion (and a proton),
and FADH<sub>2</sub> and FMNH<sub>2</sub> in turn can serve as hydride
donors in hydrogenation reactions.

<img src="media/image584.png"
style="width:5.77778in;height:2.51875in" />

fig 44

Below is a general mechanism for the dehydration of an alkene at the α,β
position - notice that it is mechanistically an E1cb elimination of
H<sub>2</sub>.

Flavin-dependent α,β dehydrogenation (oxidation) of an alkane:

<img src="media/image585.png"
style="width:3.65764in;height:0.82431in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image586.png"
style="width:3.68542in;height:4.29653in" />

fig 45 fig 45a

In many enzymatic reactions in which FADH<sub>2</sub> acts as the
reducing agent, the reaction cycle is completed when FAD, rather than
being released from the active site, is recycled back to
FADH<sub>2</sub> with the concomitant oxidation of NADH.

<img src="media/image587.png"
style="width:5.68542in;height:3.08333in" />

fig 51g

Hydride ion transfer with flavin or nicotinamide coenzymes is a *two
electron* redox process. However, unlike the nicotinamide cofactors,
flavins are also able to function in *single* electron transfer
(radical) mechanisms. We will come back to this idea briefly in the
chapter 16.

<u>Exercise 15.11</u>: Fumarate is formed in an alkane dehydrogenation
reaction (EC 1.3.5.1) which is part of the citric acid cycle:

<img src="media/image588.png"
style="width:2.85208in;height:1.10208in" />

fig 46

a\) Predict the structure of the starting substrate in this reaction

b\) Draw the structure of the enolate intermediate

<u>Exercise 15.12</u>: Reduced flavin can serve as the hydride *donor*
in some hydrogenation reactions. Degradation of the RNA base uracil
begins with hydrogenation of a conjugated alkene group by a
flavin-dependent hydrogenase enzyme (EC 1.3.1.2). Predict the product of
this step, and draw curved arrows for the first mechanistic step.

fig 47

**  
**

## Section 15.5: Monitoring hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions by UV spectroscopy

In order to study any enzyme-catalyzed reaction, a researcher must have
available some sort of test, or **assay**, in order to observe and
measure the reaction's progress and measure its rate. In many cases, an
assay simply involves running the reaction for a specified length of
time, then isolating and quantifying the product using a separation
technique such as high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) or gas
chromatography (GC). This type of assay can be extremely time-consuming,
however, so it is to the researcher's great advantage if a more
convenient assay can be found.

Redox reactions in which a nicotinamide coenzyme participates as a
hydride donor or acceptor are generally quite convenient to assay. In
fact, the progress of these reactions can usually be observed in real
time, meaning that the researcher doesn't need to stop the reaction in
order to see how far it has progressed. NADPH and NADH have distinctive
*n*-π\* UV absorbance bands centered at 340 nm, with a molar
absorptivity of 6290 M<sup>-1</sup> cm<sup>-1</sup> (section 4.4). The
oxidized coenzymes NADP<sup>+</sup> and NAD<sup>+</sup> do not absorb at
this wavelength.

<img src="media/image589.png"
style="width:5.10208in;height:3.30556in" />

fig 48

Therefore, the course of a hydrogenation reaction, in which NAD(P)H is
converted to NAD(P)<sup>+</sup>, can be observed in real time if it is
run in a quartz cuvette in a UV spectrometer. By observing the decrease
in absorbance at 340 nm, the researcher can calculate how much NAD(P)H
has been oxidized to NAD(P)<sup>+</sup> at any given time point, and
this number is the molar equivalent of the amount of organic substrate
that has been reduced:

<img src="media/image590.png"
style="width:5.54653in;height:0.86111in" />

fig 48a

Likewise, a NAD<sup>+</sup>-dependent dehydrogenase reaction can be
followed in real time by monitoring the *increase* in absorbance at 340
nm as NAD<sup>+</sup> is converted to NADH.

<u>Exercise 15.13</u>: You are observing the progress of the
(*R*)-glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase reaction shown in the figure
below.

<img src="media/image591.png"
style="width:3.73333in;height:1.11111in" />

You run the reaction in a quartz cuvette (path length 1 cm) in a total
solution volume of 1 mL. You start with 200 μM substrate and 100 μM
NADP<sup>+</sup> in solution, zero the UV spectrophotometer, then add
the enzyme to start the reaction. After 5 minutes, the A<sub>340</sub>
reading has climbed from 0.000 to 0.096. At this time point:

a\) How many moles of substrate have been oxidized?

b\) What is the solution concentration of NADP<sup>+</sup>?

c\) The enzyme has a mass of 25 kilodaltons (25,000 g/mol).You added 5
μL of a 2 ng/μL solution of pure enzyme to start the reaction. How many
reactions does each enzyme molecule catalyze, on average, per second?
(This number is referred to by biochemists as the 'turnover number').

## Section 15.6: Redox reactions of thiols and disulfides

A **disulfide bond** is a sulfur-sulfur bond, usually formed from two
free thiol groups.

<img src="media/image592.png"
style="width:1.80556in;height:1.32431in" />

fig 49

The interconversion between dithiol and disulfide groups is a redox
reaction: the free dithiol form is in the reduced state, and the
disulfide form is in the oxidized state. Notice that in the oxidized
(disulfide) state, each sulfur atom has lost a bond to hydrogen and
gained a bond to sulfur.

As you should recall from your Biology courses, disulfide bonds between
cysteine residues are an integral component of the three-dimensional
structure of many extracellular proteins and signaling peptides.

<img src="media/image593.png"
style="width:4.64444in;height:4.26667in" />

fig 49

fig 49a

A thiol-containing coenzyme called **glutathione** is integrally
involved in many thiol-disulfide redox processes (recall that
glutathione was a main player in this chapter's introductory story about
concussion research). In its reduced (thiol) form, glutathione is
abbreviated 'GSH'. In its oxidized form, glutathione exists as a dimer
of two molecules linked by a disulfide group, and is abbreviated 'GSSG'.

<img src="media/image594.png"
style="width:5.97222in;height:2.82431in" />

fig 50

Disulfide bonds and free thiol groups in both proteins and smaller
organic molecules like glutathione can 'trade places' through a
**disulfide exchange** reaction. This process is essentially a
combination of two direct displacement (S<sub>N</sub>2-like) events,
with sulfur atoms acting as nucleophile, electrophile *and* leaving
group.

Disulfide exchange reaction

<img src="media/image595.png"
style="width:3.46319in;height:0.85208in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image596.png"
style="width:4.43542in;height:3.35208in" />

fig 51

In eukaryotes, the cysteine side chains of intracellular (inside the
cell) proteins are almost always in the free thiol (reduced) state due
to the high concentration of reduced glutathione (GSH) in the
intracellular environment. A disulfide bond in an intracellular protein
will be rapidly reduced in a disulfide exchange reaction with excess
glutathione.

<img src="media/image597.png"
style="width:3.76875in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 51

The interconversion of free thiols and disulfides is also mediated by
flavin in some enzymes.

Flavin-mediated reduction of a protein disulfide bond

<img src="media/image598.png"
style="width:5.01875in;height:5.12986in" />

fig51c

Flavin-mediated oxidation of a protein disulfide bond

<img src="media/image599.png"
style="width:5.69444in;height:5.96319in" />

fig 51h

As was stated earlier, a high intracellular concentration of reduced
glutathione (GSH) serves to maintain proteins in the free thiol
(reduced) state. An enzyme called glutathione reductase catalyzes the
reduction of GSSG in a flavin-mediated process, with NADH acting as the
ultimate hydride donor.

Gluthione reductase reaction:

<img src="media/image600.png"
style="width:3.08889in;height:1.04444in" />

fig 51a

The mechanism for this and other similar reactions is not yet completely
understood, but evidence points to an initial thiol-disulfide exchange
reaction with a pair of cysteines from the enzyme, (phase 1 below)
followed by flavin-dependent reduction of the cysteine-cysteine
disulfide (phase 2). Finally, (phase 3) FAD is reduced back to
FADH<sub>2</sub> by NADH. Frey and Hegeman, Enzymatic Reaction
Mechanisms, p. 699

Phase 1: thiol-disulfide exchange (*see earlier figure for mechanism*):

<img src="media/image601.png"
style="width:3.46319in;height:1.05556in" />

fig 51b

Phase 2: Reduction of protein disulfide by FADH<sub>2</sub> (see
*earlier figure for mechanism*)

<img src="media/image602.png"
style="width:3.74097in;height:0.63889in" />

fig 51c

Phase 3: regeneration of FADH<sub>2</sub> by NADH (*see section 15.4B
for mechanism*)

<img src="media/image603.png"
style="width:2.02778in;height:0.61111in" />

fig 51d

In the biochemistry lab, proteins are often maintained in their reduced
(free thiol) state by incubation in buffer containing an excess
concentration of β-mercaptoethanol (BME) or dithiothreitol (DTT). These
reducing agents function in a manner similar to that of GSH, except that
DTT, because it has two thiol groups, can form an *intramolecular*
disulfide in its oxidized form.

<img src="media/image604.png" style="width:3in;height:1.19444in" />

fig 52

<u>Exercise 15.14:</u> Draw structures of the oxidized (disulfide) forms
of BME and DTT.

## Section 15.7: Flavin-dependent monooxygenase reactions: hydroxylation, epoxidation, and the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation

Up to now, the redox reaction examples we have seen have all been either
hydrogenation/dehydrogenation transformations or interconversions
between free thiols and disulfides. However, there are many important
redox reactions in biological chemistry which do not fall under either
of these descriptions. **Oxygenase** enzymes catalyze the insertion of
one or two oxygen atoms from molecular oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>) into an
organic substrate molecule. Enzymes which insert a single oxygen atom
are called **monooxygenases**. Below are two examples of biochemical
transformations catalyzed by monooxygenase enzymes: one is a
hydroxylation, the other is an epoxidation (an **epoxide** functional
group is composed of a three-membered carbon-carbon-oxygen ring -
epoxides are somewhat rare in biological organic chemistry but are very
common and useful intermediates in laboratory organic synthesis).

<img src="media/image605.png"
style="width:3.60208in;height:2.54653in" />

fig 56

**Dioxygenase** enzymes insert both oxygen atoms from O<sub>2</sub> into
the substrate, and usually involve cleavage of an aromatic ring. Below
is an example of a dioxygenase reaction, catalyzed by catechol
dioxygenase:

<img src="media/image606.png"
style="width:3.61111in;height:0.66667in" />

In the reduction direction, reductases *remove* oxygen atoms, or
sometimes other electronegative heteratoms such as nitrogen or halides.
For example, DNA **deoxy**ribonucleosides are converted from their
corresponding RNA ribonucleosides by the action of reductase enzymes:

<img src="media/image607.png"
style="width:4.44444in;height:1.49097in" />

fig 58

Many oxygenase and reductase reactions involve the participation of
enzyme-bound transition metals - such as iron or copper - and the
mechanistic details of these reactions are outside the scope of our
discussion. A variety of biochemical monooxygenase reactions, however,
involve flavin as a redox cofactor, and we do have sufficient background
knowledge at this point to understand these mechanisms. In
flavin-dependent monooxygenase reactions, the key intermediate species
is **flavin hydroperoxide**.

The term 'peroxide' refers to a functional group characterized by an
oxygen-oxygen single bond. The simplest peroxide is hydrogen peroxide
(HOOH) about which we will have more to say below. In flavin
hydroperoxide, the peroxide group is linked to one of the carbons of the
reactive triple-ring system of the coenzyme. A possible mechanism for
the formation of flavin peroxide from FADH<sub>2</sub> and molecular
oxygen is shown below.

Silverman, R.B. The Organic Chemistry of Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions, p.
121-122, Scheme 3.33. 2000, Academic Press, San Diego.

Mechanism for the formation of flavin hydroperoxide:

<img src="media/image608.png"
style="width:5.30556in;height:2.18542in" />

fig 59a

(Note: Implicit in this mechanism is that the molecular oxygen first
undergoes spin inversion from the triplet state to the higher energy
'singlet' state. You may recall from your general chemistry course that
molecular oxygen exists in two states: 'singlet' oxygen has a double
bond and no unpaired electrons, while 'triplet' oxygen has a single O-O
bond and two unpaired electrons - a kind of 'double radical'. Molecular
orbital theory - and experimental evidence - show that the triplet state
is lower in energy.

<img src="media/image609.png"
style="width:2.30556in;height:0.68542in" />

fig 60

The mechanism shown above is one proposed mechanism, another proposal
involves triplet oxygen reacting with flavin in a series of
radical-intermediate, single-electron steps.)

Flavin hydroperoxide can be thought of as an activated form of molecular
oxygen. ***Peroxides in general are potent oxidizing agents, because the
oxygen-oxygen single bond is quite weak***: only 138 kJ/mole, compared
to 339 kJ/mol for a carbon-carbon bond, and 351 kJ/mol for a
carbon-oxygen bond. When the 'outer' oxygen of flavin hydroperoxide (red
in our figure above) comes into close proximity to the π-bonded
electrons of an alkene or aromatic group, the O-O bond will break,
leaving an empty orbital on the outer oxygen to be filled by the π
electrons - thus, a new carbon-oxygen bond is formed. This is what is
happening in step 1 of a reaction in the tryptophan degradation pathway
catalyzed by kynurenine 3-monooxygenase. Step 2 completes what is,
mechanistically speaking, an electrophilic aromatic substitution
reaction (section 14.4) with an peroxide oxygen electrophile.

Mechanism for the flavin hydroperoxide-dependent hydroxylation of
kynurenine:

<img src="media/image610.png"
style="width:5.54444in;height:4.78889in" />

fig 61a

<img src="media/image611.png"
style="width:5.12222in;height:4.17778in" />

fig 61

Elimination of water from the hydroxyflavin intermediate then leads to
formation of FAD (step 3), which is subsequently reduced back to
FADH<sub>2</sub> by NADH (step 4).

The *N*-hydroxylation reaction below, which is part of the of the
biosynthetic pathway of an iron-binding molecule in the pathogenic
bacterium *Pseudomonas aeruginosa,* is mechanistically similar to the
*C*-hydroxylation reaction we just saw, except that the nucleophile is
an amine nitrogen. Note that FADH<sub>2</sub> is shown in brackets below
the reaction arrow, indicating that reduced flavin participates in the
reaction but is not used up - rather it is regenerated in the active
site at the end of the reaction cycle.

<img src="media/image612.png"
style="width:4.14444in;height:1.33333in" />

fig 61b

<u>Exercise 15.15</u>: Draw arrows for the N-O bond-forming step in the
ornithine hydroxylation reaction above.

**Epoxides,** characterized by a three-membered ring composed of two
carbons and one oxygen, are a very common and useful functional group
employed in synthetic organic chemistry. Although rare, there are some
interesting epoxide-forming reactions in biochemical pathways, catalyzed
by flavin-dependent monooxygenase enzymes.

In a key step in the biosynthesis of cholesterol and other steroid
compounds, an alkene is converted to an epoxide in a precursor molecule
called squalene. Flavin hydroperoxide also serves as the direct
oxidizing agent in this step:

Mechanism for the flavin-hydroperoxide-dependent epoxidation of
squalene:

<img src="media/image613.png" style="width:6in;height:3.54889in" />

fig 62

Oxidosqualene goes on to cyclize to lanosterol in a complex and
fascinating electrophilic reaction which we discussed in section 14.5.

Epoxidation reactions have a parallel in the synthetic organic
laboratory, and in fact are very important tools in organic synthesis.
In laboratory epoxidations, **peroxyacids** are the counterpart to
flavin hydroperoxide in biochemical epoxidations.
*meta*-chloroperoxybenxoic acid (MCPBA) is a commonly used peroxyacid.

<img src="media/image614.png"
style="width:3.87986in;height:1.32431in" />

fig 62d

The Baeyer-Villiger oxidation, in which a ketone is converted to an
ester through treatment with a peroxide reagent, is an extremely useful
laboratory organic synthesis reaction discovered in the late 19th
century. Recently, many biochemical examples of Baeyer-Villiger
oxidations have been discovered: the reaction below, for example, is
catalyzed by a monooxygenase in a thermophilic bacterium:

(*Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A*. **2004**, *101*, 13157)

A Baeyer-Villiger oxidation:

<img src="media/image615.png" style="width:4.71111in;height:1.2in" />

Mechanism:

<img src="media/image616.png" style="width:6in;height:1.83051in" />

fig 62a

The Baeyer-Villiger mechanism is differs significantly from the
hydroxylation reactions we saw earlier, although flavin hydroperoxide
(abbreviated in the above figure) still plays a key role. Here, the
peroxide oxygen is a nucleophile, rather than an electrophile, attacking
the ketone carbonyl in step 1. Step 2 is a rearrangement, similar in
many ways to the hydride and alkyl shifts we learned about in section
14.5. The electrons in the red bond in the figure shift over one atom:
from the carbonyl carbon to the outer peroxide oxygen. The end result is
that an oxygen atom, from O<sub>2</sub> via flavin hydroperoxide, has
been inserted between the carbonyl carbon and a neighboring methylene
(CH<sub>2</sub>) carbon, forming an ester.

Note that in the reaction mechanism above, the ketone substrate is
*asymmetric*: on one side of the carbonyl there is a benzyl group
(CH<sub>2</sub>-phenyl), and on the other side a methyl group. Note also
that it is the benzyl group, not the methyl, that shifts in step 2 of
the mechanism. For reasons that are not yet well understood, in
Baeyer-Villiger reactions the alkyl group with higher carbocation
stability has a higher **migratory aptitude**: in other words, it has a
lower energy barrier for the shifting step.

<u>Exercise 15.16</u>: Draw the product of a *hypothetical*
Baeyer-Villiger reaction involving the same substrate as the above
figure, in which the methyl rather than the benzyl group shifts.

<u>Exercise 15.17</u>: Draw the likely major product of a hypothetical
Baeyer Villiger reaction starting with 2-methylcyclopentanone as the
substrate. Take into account the idea of migratory aptitude.

Below is another example of a Baeyer-Villiger reaction in which a cyclic
ketone is oxidized to a lactone (cyclic ester). Notice that oxygen
insertion expands the ring from 6 to 7 atoms. This is the third-to-last
step in the biosynthesis of the anti-cancer agent mithromycin in some
bacterial species (*ACS Chem. Biol*. **2013**, *8*, 2466).

<img src="media/image617.png" style="width:6in;height:1.69307in" />

fig 62c

Yet another variety of flavin-dependent monooxygenase, which bears some
mechanistic similarity to the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation, is the
decarboxylative reaction below from biosynthesis of the plant hormone
auxin: (*J. Biol. Chem.* **2013**, *288*, 1448)

<img src="media/image618.png"
style="width:4.22222in;height:1.43333in" />

fig 62e

<u>Exercise 15.18</u>: Propose a mechanism for the above reaction,
starting with flavin hydroperoxide.

## Section 15.8: Hydrogen peroxide as a dangerous Reactive Oxygen Species

We get our energy from the oxidation of organic molecules such as fat
and carbohydrates, as electrons from these reduced compounds are
transferred to molecular oxygen, thereby reducing it to water. Reducing
O<sub>2</sub>, however, turns out to be a hazardous activity: harmful
side products called **reactive oxygen species** (ROS) are inevitably
formed in the process. Recall from the story introducing this chapter
that ROS appear to play an important role in the damage that occurs to
the brain immediately after a concussion.

Hydrogen peroxide, HOOH, is an ROS. Recall peroxides are potent
oxidizing agents due to the weakness of the O-O single bond. It is this
same weak bond that causes hydrogen peroxide to be dangerous when
produced in our bodies, as it can react spontaneously with oxygen or
nitrogen nucleophiles and π bonds.

Peroxide formed as a by-product of our metabolism is particularly
harmful when it oxidizes DNA bases. In just one of many known examples
of oxidative damage, the DNA base cytosine is oxidized to thymine glycol
in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. Although mechanistic details for
reactions such as these are not yet well understood, one possibility is
electrophilic addition:

<img src="media/image619.png" style="width:5.25in;height:1.65764in" />

fig 53

Our bodies have evolved ways to dispose of the harmful reactive oxygen
species that are continuously being formed (the only way to stop the
production of ROS is to stop breathing oxygen!). Glutathione peroxidase
is a remarkable enzyme in that its active site contains selanocysteine,
a modified cysteine residue in which the side chain sulfur is replaced
by selenium (selenium is very toxic, but we do need a very small amount
of it in our diet). Look at a periodic table: selenium is below oxygen
and sulfur in the same column. If you think back to the vertical
periodic trends in nucleophilicity (section 8.2B), you'll recall that
just as a thiol is a better nucleophile than an alcohol, a selanol
(RSeH) is even more nucleophilic than a thiol. Moreover, the vertical
periodic trend in acidity (section 7.3A) tells us that a selenol should
be more acidic than a thiol - in fact, the pKa of a selenocysteine is
about 5.5, meaning that it is mostly in its deprotonated state at
physiological pH, making it even more nucleophilic.

Glutathione peroxidase very efficiently catalyzes the reduction of
hydrogen peroxide to water and the oxidation of glutathione (GSH) to
GSSG, beginning with nucleophilic attack by the enzymatic selanocysteine
on a peroxide oxygen. The intermediates in this process are shown below:
each step can be thought of as a concerted nucleophilic displacement
similar to those that take place in a disulfide exchange reaction.

<img src="media/image620.png"
style="width:5.71319in;height:2.15764in" />

fig 54

*Eur. J. Biochem*. **1983**, *133*, 51

*Biochem. et Biophys. Acta* **2009**, *1790*, 1486

## Key learning objectives for this chapter

*Before moving on to the next chapter, you should be able to:*

Recognize when an organic molecule is being oxidized or reduced, and
distinguish between redox and non-redox organic reactions.

Draw complete mechanisms for the following reaction types, including the
structure of the reactive part of the redox coenzyme (*it is strongly
recommended that you commit to memory the structures of the reactive
parts of the nicotinamide and flavin coenzymes).*

> oxidation of an alcohol to an aldehyde or ketone
>
> oxidation of an amine to an imine
>
> oxidation of an aldehyde to a carboxylic acid derivative (usually a
> thioester or carboxylate)
>
> oxidation of an alkane to an alkene at the α,β position relative to a
> carbonyl or imine
>
> reduction of an aldehyde or ketone to an alcohol
>
> reduction of an imine to an amine
>
> reduction of a carboxylic acid derivative to an aldehyde
>
> reduction of an α,β - conjugated alkene to an alkane
>
> oxidation of two thiol groups to a disulfide in a disulfide-exchange
> type reaction
>
> reduction of a disulfide group by flavin
>
> flavin hydroperoxide-dependent hydroxylation, epoxidation, and
> Baeyer-Villiger reactions
>
> reduction of FAD (or FMN) to FADH<sub>2</sub> (or FMNH<sub>2</sub>) by
> NAD(P)H.
>
> spontaneous oxidation of an alkene group in a biomolecule by hydrogen
> peroxide
>
> reduction of hydrogen peroxide by glutathione peroxidase

In addition, you should be able to draw complete mechanisms for
hydrogenation-dehydrogenation and disulfide exchange reactions that we
have not yet seen specific examples of, based on your understanding of
the chemistry involved in these reaction types and organic reaction
patterns in general. Several exercises and end-of-chapter problems
provide opportunities practice with inferring and drawing mechanisms of
less familiar redox reactions.

Given a multistep pathway diagram, you should be able to recognize the
transformations taking place and fill in missing intermediate compounds
or reagents (problem 15.5 is an example of this type).

You should be working on gaining proficiency at solving multi-step
pathway elucidation problems, such as those at the end of this chapter's
problem section.

## Problems

**P15.1:** Show a mechanism for each of the redox reactions below. Do
not abbreviate the reactive parts of the redox coenzyme.

a\)

<img src="media/image621.png"
style="width:4.68542in;height:1.35208in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image622.png"
style="width:4.40764in;height:1.01875in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image623.png"
style="width:4.11111in;height:0.99097in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image624.png"
style="width:3.93542in;height:0.71319in" />

e\)

<img src="media/image625.png"
style="width:4.63889in;height:0.60208in" />

f\)

<img src="media/image626.png"
style="width:3.52778in;height:0.83333in" />

g\) (regeneration of reduced flavin by NADH):

<img src="media/image627.png"
style="width:1.88889in;height:0.65764in" />

h\) In reaction (a), near which face of the substrate is the cofactor
bound in the active site?

i\) ) In reaction (d), near which face of the product is the cofactor
bound in the active site?

**P15.2:** In the reactions below ((EC 2.7.2.4; EC 1.2.1.11) , the side
chain of aspartate is altered, but the main peptide chain is not
affected. Show the most probable structure of species A and B.

<img src="media/image628.png"
style="width:3.44444in;height:1.13889in" />

**P15.3:** Propose complete mechanisms for the following reactions.

a\) (EC 1.3.1.26, from lysine biosynthesis)

<img src="media/image629.png"
style="width:3.71319in;height:0.91667in" />

(

b\) (EC 1.1.1.205, from guanosine ribonucleotide biosynthesis) The
mechanism involves a covalent cysteine-linked enzyme-substrate
intermediate.

<img src="media/image630.png"
style="width:3.40764in;height:1.46319in" />

**P15.4:** The first step in the lysine degradation pathway is a
reductive condensation with α-ketoglutarate to form an intermediate
called saccharopine. (EC 1.5.1.8)

a\) Propose a mechanism for this transformation.

<img src="media/image631.png"
style="width:5.41667in;height:1.12986in" />

b\) Saccharopine (see part (a) above) is then broken up to yield
glutamate and a second product that contains an aldehyde group. Predict
the structure of this second product, and propose a likely mechanism for
the reaction which involves and imine intermediate.

(EC 1.5.1.10

<img src="media/image632.png"
style="width:5.66667in;height:1.16667in" />

(

**  
**

**P15.5:** Predict the structures of species A and B in the pathway
below.

<img src="media/image633.png"
style="width:4.68542in;height:2.10208in" />

**P15.6**: Bilirubin, the molecule responsible for the yellowish color
of bruises, is formed from the NADPH-dependent hydrogenation of a double
bond in biliverdin (EC 1.3.1.24), which is a product of heme degradation
(heme is an iron-containing coenzyme in the oxygen-carrying blood
protein hemoglobin). Draw a likely mechanism for this reaction.

<img src="media/image634.png"
style="width:5.35208in;height:1.36111in" />

**P15.7:** Draw a likely mechanism for each of the reactions below.

**a)** From the oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids: (*J. Biol.
Chem* **2005**, *280*, 3068)

<img src="media/image635.png"
style="width:3.99097in;height:0.62986in" />

b\) (*ChemBioChem* **2013**, *14*, 1998, Scheme 2

<img src="media/image636.png"
style="width:5.55556in;height:0.90764in" />

**P15.8**: Predict the structures of pathway intermediates A, B, and C:

<img src="media/image637.png"
style="width:5.36111in;height:3.36111in" />

**P15.9**: An enzyme called DsbA (EC1.8.4.2) is responsible for the
formation of disulfide bonds in bacterial proteins. The process - which
can be thought of as a 'disulfide exchange', involves the cleavage of a
disulfide bond between two active site cysteines in DsbA. It is
accomplished through two successive S<sub>N</sub>2 displacements.

<img src="media/image638.png"
style="width:4.90764in;height:1.04653in" />

*Biochemistry* **2000***, 39*, 6732

DsbA is then returned to it's starting (disulfide) state through a
second disulfide exchange reaction with another protein called DsbB:

<img src="media/image639.png"
style="width:4.61111in;height:2.35208in" />

Scientists were interested in studying the intermediate species formed
in step 3, but found that it is very short-lived and difficult to
isolate. In order to address this problem, they ran the reaction with a
synthetic analog of DsbB that contained an unnatural bromoalanine amino
acid in place of one of the active site cysteines.

a\) Draw a complete mechanism for the disulfide exchange reaction
between DsbA and DsbB.

b\) Show how the bromoalanine-containing DsbB analog allowed for the
isolation of an intermediate that resembles the true, short-lived
intermediate.

(*J. Am. Chem. Soc*. **2004**, *126*, 15060; *J. Nat. Prod*. **2001**,
*64*, 597).

**P15.10:**

a\) In chapter 16 we will learn how ascorbate (vitamin C) acts as a
'radical scavenger' antioxidant to protect our cells from damage by free
radical species. When ascorbate scavenges a radical, it ends up being
converted to dehydroascorbate . One possible metabolic fate of
dehydroascorbate is to be recycled back to ascorbate through an
enzyme-free reaction with glutathione. *Biochemistry* **1999**, *38*,
268.

<img src="media/image640.png"
style="width:4.11111in;height:1.23333in" />

probfig10a

Suggest a likely mechanism for the enzyme-free reaction.

b\) In the introduction to chapter 16, we will learn that most animals -
but not humans - are able to synthesize their own ascorbate. Humans
cannot synthesize vitamin C because we lack the enzyme for the final
step in the biosynthetic pathway, gulonolactone oxidase:

<img src="media/image641.png" style="width:4.36667in;height:1.2in" />

This enzyme uses FAD as an oxidizing agent, and FADH<sub>2</sub> is
oxidized back to FAD at the end of the catalytic cycle by molecular
oxygen, with hydrogen peroxide as a side product. Draw out a likely
mechanism showing how gulonolactone is converted to ascorbate, and how
FAD is regenerated.

c\) Artemisinin is a naturally occurring compound with demonstrated
antimalarial properties. It is thought to act by depleting the
malaria-causing microbe's store of reduced flavin, thus disrupting the
redox balance. The relevant reaction is shown below:

<img src="media/image642.png"
style="width:4.46319in;height:1.74097in" />

Draw mechanistic arrows for the step as shown above. (*Molecules*
**2010**, *15*, 1705)

d\) Draw the mechanistic step in the reaction below in which the C-O
bond indicated by the arrow in the figure below is formed.

<img src="media/image643.png" style="width:2.77778in;height:1in" />

**P15.11:** Methanogens are a class of microorganisms in the domain
archaea which inhabit a diversity of anaerobic (oxygen-lacking)
environments, from the intestines of humans, to swamp mud, to the base
of deep sea hot water vents. They obtain energy by reducing carbon
dioxide to methane:

CO<sub>2</sub> + 4H<sub>2</sub> → CH<sub>4</sub> + 2 H<sub>2</sub>O +
energy

Methanogenesis', like the oxidation of glucose in animals, is not
accomplished in a single reaction - it requires a long series of
enzymatic steps, and involves the participation of several unique
coenzymes (if you are interested in learning more, see *FEMS Microbiol.
Rev*. **1999**, *23*, 13 for a detailed review of the enzymatic
reactions of methanogenesis).

The oxidation of methane to carbon dioxide when you burn natural gas for
heating your house is obviously an exergonic process. How then is it
possible that reducing carbon dioxide to methane could also be
exergonic? Explain.

**Multistep pathway prediction problems**

In chapters 12 and 13, we were introduced to the challenge of mapping
out potential multi-step transformations using the retrosynthesis
approach, where we start with the more complex molecule and take it
apart step be step. These problems have necessarily involved
hypothetical, generalized transformations, because many of the reaction
types involved in actual biochemical transformations were as-yet
unfamiliar to us.

We have now reached a point in our study of organic reactivity where we
can look at an actual metabolic pathway and probably recognize *most* of
the reactions taking place - so were are ready to try our hand at
mapping out real metabolic pathways.

Before we dive in, you may want to go back to the retrosynthesis
interchapter and review the key elements of the retrosynthetic approach.
You may (or may not) also need a little more practice with some simpler,
shorter, hypothetical problems, similar to what we worked on in the last
three chapters but incorporating some of the redox reactions that we
have just finished learning about. These are provided in problems 15.12
and 15.13 below.

As before, your job is to draw out a 'pathway diagram' for each
transformation, using the 'arrow in - arrow out' convention to indicate
the role of other necessary participants in each reaction, such as ATP,
NADH, water, or another organic molecule. An example for a simple
two-step pathway is provided in problem 15.12 below. A three-step
pathway would of course show *two* intermediate compounds.

Remember, it is most important that your proposed pathway be *chemically
reasonable* - in other words, each hypothetical reaction that you
propose should be very similar to a reaction pattern that we have seen
in chapters 8-15. You should be able to put a name on each step: for
example, 'step 1 is a Claisen condensation; step 2 is a ketone
reduction', and so forth.

Also remember that there is usually no one correct way to approach
problems like this - they are puzzles to solve, and success will be
dependent in large part on having

a solid grasp on the chemical 'tools' available to us: in other words,
the biochemical reaction types that we have been studying, starting with
nucleophilic substitutions in chapter 8.

**P15.12**: hypothetical 2-step transformations:

Each of the generalized transformations below would be expected to
require *two* enzymatic steps. Draw a reasonable pathway diagram for
each transformation.

***Example***:

<img src="media/image644.png"
style="width:2.36111in;height:0.58333in" />

***Diagram***:

<img src="media/image645.png"
style="width:4.52778in;height:0.69444in" />

*The first step is a nicotinamide-dependent ketone
reduction/hydrogenation, and step 2 is ATP-dependent phosphorylation
(ie. a kinase reaction). Note that the reducing agent in the first step
could also be NADPH)*

a\)

<img src="media/image646.png"
style="width:3.62986in;height:0.61111in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image647.png"
style="width:3.49097in;height:0.55556in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image648.png"
style="width:4.86111in;height:0.60208in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image649.png"
style="width:3.01875in;height:0.60208in" />

e\)

<img src="media/image650.png"
style="width:4.35208in;height:0.61111in" />

f\)

<img src="media/image651.png"
style="width:4.58333in;height:0.60208in" />

**P15.13**: hypothetical 3-step transformations:

Each of the generalized transformations below would be expected to
require three enzymatic steps. Draw a reasonable pathway diagram for
each transformation.

a\)

<img src="media/image652.png"
style="width:4.24097in;height:0.94444in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image653.png"
style="width:3.04653in;height:0.82431in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image654.png"
style="width:4.11111in;height:0.79653in" />

d\)

<img src="media/image655.png"
style="width:5.47222in;height:0.63889in" />

**P15.14**: Now, let's try our hand at predicting the steps of some
actual metabolic pathways. For each, draw a complete pathway diagram. As
needed, use any of the coenzymes we have studied, water, and ammonia.

***Note**: you will probably find these quite challenging! Do not expect
to be able to figure them out in a few minutes - rather, think of them
as puzzles to work on over a period of time, sharing ideas and
strategies with classmates. Remember, if one side of the transformation
is larger or more complex, start there and work towards the simpler
molecules. It is also a good idea, when applicable, to start the process
by a) counting carbons on each side of the transformation, and b)
identifying the key bond being formed (or broken) in the
transformation.*

a\)

<img src="media/image656.png"
style="width:5.10208in;height:0.91667in" />

b\)

<img src="media/image657.png"
style="width:3.41667in;height:1.16667in" />

c\)

<img src="media/image658.png"
style="width:5.90764in;height:0.58333in" />

e\)

<img src="media/image659.png"
style="width:4.43542in;height:1.87986in" />

f\)

<img src="media/image660.png"
style="width:5.32431in;height:1.26875in" />

**P15.15:** Propose a pathway diagram for each of the metabolic pathways
below. Note that some pathways contain steps that will be unfamiliar to
you, and are therefore provided already.

a\) one cycle of fatty acid biosynthesis:

<img src="media/image661.png" style="width:5.82431in;height:1in" />

b\) one cycle of fatty acid degradation:

<img src="media/image662.png"
style="width:5.37986in;height:1.01875in" />

c\) Diabetics and people who adopt an extreme low-carbohydrate diet
sometimes have breath that smells like acetone, due to 'ketone body'
formation that occurs when acetyl-CoA from fatty acid oxidation (see
part (b) above) is not able to enter into the citric acid cycle. Draw a
pathway diagram showing how three molecules of excess acetyl CoA combine
to form acetone (all three acetyl-CoA molecules first link together, but
one is left over at the end of the process).

<img src="media/image663.png"
style="width:4.66667in;height:0.87986in" />

d\) Pentose phosphate pathway (oxidative branch):

<img src="media/image664.png"
style="width:4.57431in;height:1.32431in" />

e\) Citric acid (Krebs) cycle:

<img src="media/image665.png" style="width:6in;height:3.93542in" />

f\) proline biosynthesis:

<img src="media/image666.png"
style="width:3.68542in;height:1.19444in" />

g\) First half of lysine biosynthesis:

<img src="media/image667.png"
style="width:5.24097in;height:0.99097in" />

h\) From the biosynthesis of membrane lipid in archaea: *J. Bacteriol.*
**2003**, *185*, 1181

<img src="media/image668.png"
style="width:3.65764in;height:3.96319in" />

